The presence of δόξα terminology in 2 Corinthians has captured the atten­
tion of scholars in recent years. L.L. Belleville has investigated the Sinai
glory traditions in the epistle (2 Cor 3:11-18), arguing that Paul was coun­
tering intertestamental and proto-rabbinic traditions that attributed an
ever-increasing glory to Moses. 1 C.C. Newman has claimed that in Pauls
glory-Christology (1 Cor 2:8; 2 Cor 3:4-4:6; 8:19) the various strands of
the glory tradition in the LXX and Second Temple Judaism coalesce: divine
theophany, the revelation at Sinai, the Messianic and prophetic hope, and
apocalyptic throne visions. 2 A. Segal has also proposed that Paul, an apos­
tate Pharisee, identified the glory of the risen Jesus (2 Cor 3:18) with the
Kavod (a technical term for the human form of God appearing in human
visions). 3 In sum, the Jewish context of δόξα in 2 Corinthians has been
extensively explored.
However, Paul's reference to the brothers accompanying the Jerusalem
collection as the "glory of Christ" (δόξα Χρίστου: 2 Cor 8:23) has not
commanded the same attention. This neglect is somewhat surprising given
that Paul has already spoken of Titus undertaking the administration of
the collection "for the glory of the Lord himself" (2 Cor 8:19: την [αύτοΰ]
του κυρίου δόξαν). So far, exegesis of the phrase δόξα Χρίστου has taken
two directions as far as the background of Paul's thought. First, scholars
who view δόξα Χρίστου from a theological perspective have understood
the phrase as a reference to the Isaianic prophecies of Yahweh's glory resid­
ing in Jerusalem (Isa 60:1-2, 7, 13, 19 [LXX: το όνομα το ενδοξον Κυρίου];
62:2 [LXX: την δόξαν σου]) or consider it to be an allusion to the Isaianic
"servant" being the "light of the nations" (Isa 42:6; 49:6). 4 The theological
reason for the citation of these particular Isaianic texts is clear enough. The
divine glory of Jerusalem attracts the nations and their kings who, in sub­
mission to Yahweh, bring gifts of tribute to the Israelites (Isa 60:4-16;
62:2; cf. 66:19-22; cf. 52:13-15). Thus the Gentile delegates accompany­
ing the Jerusalem collection fulfil in an unexpected way the Isaianic escha-
tological hope of a restored Zion. The delegates also fulfil the "glorious"
role of the "Servant of the Lord"—whose ministry is equally directed at
Israel (Isa 49:5a, 6a) and the Gentile nations (Isa 42:6b; 49:6b; cf. Acts
13:47)—in delivering the collection of the Gentile churches to the mother
church at Jerusalem. 5
Alternatively, P. Barnett has pointed to New Testament texts that associ­
ate "light" imagery with glory (Phil 2:15; Rev 1:16), positing that δόξα
Χρίστου refers to the Macedonian churches as opposed to the Gentile del­
egates. 6 However, in my opinion, M.J. Harris seals the grammatical case
for the referent of δόξα Χρίστου being the delegates by pointing to the
parallelism between 2 Cor 8:23a (the description of Titus: κοινωνός έμός,
εις ύμας συνεργός) and 2 Cor 8:23b (the description of Pauls two fellow
delegates: άπστολοι εκκλησιών, δόξα Χρίστου). 7 As Harris concludes, "the
balance between v. 23a and b is clear: in each case there is an identification
followed by a double description." 8
Second, another group of scholars explains the meaning of δόξα Χρίστου
from contextual clues within the preceding argument. Thus the phrase
refers to the embodiment and promotion of Christs glory (2 Cor 3:18: την
9
δόξαν κυρίου; 8:19: την [αύτοΰ] του κυρίου δόξαν) or denotes the servant
attitude of the church delegates undertaking the collection (8:18: ου ό
10
έπαινος εν τω εύγγελίω δια πασών των εκκλησιών).
However, the benefaction context of δόξα in the honorific inscriptions
and in the works of the popular philosophers has been almost entirely
bypassed in scholarly discussion. 11 Even F.W. Danker, in his magnum opus
on eastern Mediterranean benefaction terminology, does not analyse the
semantic field of δόξα, even though the word is regularly used of benefac­
tors in the honorific inscriptions. 12 But, in his commentary on 2 Corinthi­
ans, Danker cites two inscriptions illustrating the benefaction background
of δόξα Χρίστου. 13 The results are fruitful for our investigation. As Danker
concludes,
The Greco-Roman world was noted for heads of state and public-spirited individuals
who enhanced their own reputations {doxa) or those of a city or organisation through
munificent gifts or magnanimous actions The Corinthians can be assured that Titus
and his company belong in the category of those who enhance the glory and prestige
of others, in this instance, Christ At the same time, Paul has enhanced the reputations
14
of the envoys through his generous accolades
The failure of commentators on 2 Corinthians (pace, Danker) to discuss
the benefaction background of δόξα Χρίστου is an important oversight
when one remembers the wide range of inscnptional benefaction termi­
nology that Paul uses to describe the Jerusalem collection. 15 Apart from the
explosion of the language of "grace" in 2 Corinthians 8-9, 16 the presence of
the language of "completion ' in 2 Corinthians 8:1-15 (έπιτελειν: 8:6, 11)
points to the presence of well-known benefaction conventions in Paul's
17
arguments preceding v.23. The language of "abundance" pervading 2
18
Corinthians 8 is another instance of benefaction parlance. The image
of the "impoverished" benefactor (2 Cor 8:9: έπτώχευσεν), although not
widely used in the ancient world, was sufficiently well known to be a
19
matter of heated debate in antiquity. Indeed, the morality of the self-
impoverishment of benefactors continued to draw varied responses from
moralists such as Plutarch in the first century AD. 2 0 Furthermore, in the
pericope (2 Cor 8:16-24) in which the phrase δόξα Χρίστου appears, Paul
employs traditional terminology that characterised the munificent spirit of
civic benefactors in the eulogistic inscriptions: σπουδή (v. 16; cf. 8:7, 8);
σπουδαιότερος (v. 17); έπαινος (ν.18); προθυμία (ν.19; cf. 8:12); προνοοΰμεν
(v.21); καλά (v.21); σπουδαιον δντα (ν.22); ενδειξις (ν.24). 21 Whatever
allusions Paul might be making to the Old Testament "glory" and "ser­
vant" traditions in w. 16-24, there is little doubt that Pauls argument is
even more significantly shaped by the rhetorical conventions of the public
inscriptions in honour of local benefactors in the eastern Mediterranean
city-states. In the face of the avalanche of benefaction motifs in 2 Corin­
thians 8:1-24, the question arises whether Paul is merely endorsing the
demands of the Graeco-Roman honour system within the body of Christ
(Rom 12:10b; 13:7b) or whether he is operating in a more subtle manner
in w. 16-24 regarding the honour system than we initially imagine (1 Cor
12:22-25)? And if he is adopting the latter course, what is driving this
more unconventional approach?
Finally, an important area of investigation overlooked by 2 Corinthians
commentators is the imperial context of the phrase δόξα Χρίστου. As
noted, New Testament scholars have exhaustively examined the Jewish
background of δόξα in 2 Corinthians and have very briefly touched on its
eastern Mediterranean benefaction context. However, they have not been
sufficiently alert to the importance of the pursuit of ancestral glory in a
Roman context 22 —republican and imperial—when discussing the role of
δόξα in Pauls episdes. 23 The famous houses of the Roman nobiles ("nobles")
sought to equal and surpass the glory of their ancestors in a heated compe­
tition for magistracies and military victories. 24 With the advent of the prin-
cipate of Augustus in 31 BC, however, glory became rapidly the preserve
of the house of the Caesars, notwithstanding the desire of Augustus to
maintain the traditional avenues of competition among his peers for mag­
istracies and military victories. The famous republican houses of the Roman
nobles declined rapidly in political influence because the overflowing bene­
ficence of the Julio-Claudian world-benefactors outstripped the ability
of the nobles to maintain their inherited client base and to attract new
clients. How would the Corinthians, sensitive both to the pursuit of
ancestral honour in the Roman colony of Corinth and the demands of the
26
imperial cult, have responded to Pauls honorific of δόξα Χρίστου for his
co-workers in the Jerusalem collection? Are we witnessing here the emer­
gence of a counter-imperial household with its alternate benefaction net­
works and its rituals of honour in honour of a crucified Lord of glory
27
(lCor2:8)?
This paper proposes that the honorific inscriptions afford us insight into
why Paul described his colleagues-in-beneficence as δόξα Χρίστου. Paul
works within the rhetorical conventions of the honorific decrees, but
upends their eulogistic rationale by attributing, in a bold counter-imperial
move, all glory to Christ and by deflecting Christ s glory to his dependents
as they serve the needy in their communities of faith. These multi-racial
communities of Christ not only had established local expressions of benef­
icence, in the manner of traditional eastern Mediterranean euergetism, but
the collaborative effort of Jerusalem collection also demonstrated their
ability to service fragile communities-in-need and the socially marginalised
across the boundaries of empire and the rivalries of the Greek city-states. 28
Seemingly another competitor to the Julio-Claudian title, "benefactor of
the world", had emerged that would increasingly attract the attention of
the Roman ruler as the early Christian movement proclaimed and embod-
ied an alternate reign of grace. 29
What, then, does the hellenistic and imperial epigraphic evidence reveal
about the understanding of δόξα in a benefaction context?
The following four inscriptions in which δόξα and its cognates occur are
selected for discussion because of the light they throw on how the pursuit
of "reputation" shaped and fuelled the ideals of city-states in the eastern
Mediterranean basin and in the southern Italian peninsula. 30 The first two
inscriptions illustrate the quest for "glory" on behalf of benefactors in the
late hellenistic age, whereas the final two inscriptions demonstrate the con­
striction and redirection of the quest for "glory" in the first two centuries
31
of the imperial age.
First, a letter of Eumenes II to the Ionian League (c. 167/166 BC) dem­
onstrates how the language of "glory" was integral to the operations of the
ancient reciprocity system in recompensing benefactors. The king as "the
common benefactor of the Greeks" has continued the policy of his father
towards the members of League by liberating them from the threat of the
Galatian "barbarians". As Eumenes states,
... I had demonstrated on many occasions my attitude to these matters, both in public
and private, being well disposed to each of the cities and helping each of them to
achieve many of the things that relate to distinction and glory (δόξαν), which through
my actions [demonstrated]? my love of glory (την έμήν τε φιλοδοξίαν) and the grati­
tude (την εύχαριστίαν) of the league. 32
Consequently, Eumemes was reciprocated with a golden crown and golden
statue, as well as the proclamation of his honours and the conveyance of
the greetings of the League—tributes that the king reciprocates with fur­
ther use of the language of "glory". 33 We might ask whether Paul is acting
similarly in 2 Corinthians 8:16-24, as Danker posits, or whether there is
a more subtle and incisive dynamic occurring in Pauls use of the language
of "glory".
Second, an inscription of Sestos (130-100 BC) in honour of the gym-
34
nasiarch Menas, explodes with the language of "glory" some nine times.
Menas sought to "secure for himself and his descendants everlasting fame
35
(δόξαν ά(ε)ίμνηστον) through the gratitude of the people." He "surpassed
himself in the expenses he incurred and in his zeal (τήι λοιπήι φιλοδοξίαι)", 36
first by providing for the sacrifices for the gods of the gymnasium, and
then by organising races and contests of javelin and archery. We have
already referred to the reciprocation of Menas' "glory" in the "manifesto"
clause of the decree, 37 because on two occasions he held the office of gym-
nasiarch "honourably and zealously (φιλοδόξως)." 38 Most revealing, how­
ever, is the impact the "glory" of Menas had upon the young men of the
gymnasium and their teachers. Three brief extracts from the decree under­
score the physical, moral and educational transformation he effected at the
gymnasium through his magnanimous "love of glory" on behalf of his
native city:
...through (the example of) his own emulation (δια της έαυτοΰ φιλοδοξίας) he
encouraged the young men to exercise and train hard, for which the people welcomed
his zeal (το φιλόσπουδον) and eagerness and allowed him to commemorate his deeds
39
in inscriptions.. ,
... encouraging through his zeal (δια της τοιαύτης φιλοδοξίας) the young men to
exercise and train hard, which would cause the minds of the younger men by compet­
40
ing for bravery to receive a suitable training in moral excellence (προς άρετήν).. .
... and he dealt in a friendly way with all those who gave lectures, wishing in this too
41
to secure for his native city glory (το ενδοξον) through men of education.. .
Third, a decree of Cumae in the early imperial period (2 BC-AD 2) employs
the language of "glory" in recounting the generous administration of reli­
gious duties on the part of Kleanax, priest of Dionysius:
Whereas Kleanax (son) of Sarapion and natural (son) of Philodemus, our prytanis,
with ancestors well-born on both sides of the family and with unsurpassable acquies­
cence toward his country in love of glory (εις φιλοδοξίαν), has done many great
things continuously throughout his lifetime for the city, giving in to no opportunity
for the omission of care for his people, conducting his civic life for the best advantage
of the people both in word and deed, as a result of which in his present circumstances
of the love of glory, worthy of a prytanis (τας ένπρυτανευομένας αΰτω φιλοδοξίας ò
έπαινος), not only has a panegyric by the people testified on his behalf, but also
the gratitude of the people has responded to his many official acts with decrees in the
past, namely as priest of Dionysius Pandemos, he discharged his religious duties
(έπετέλεσσεν) for the mysteries founded by the city, (paid) the expenses incurred for
the penteteric organization of the mysteries, when the proportion of the expenses
showed his impressive love of glory (φιλοδοξίαν) and piety.. . 4 2
The convergence of "word and deed" in the character of Kleanax would
have appealed to Paul conceptually, 43 but the "love of glory" that moti­
vated Kleanax' integrated lifestyle is civic in its focus, as opposed to the
eschatological focus of glory in Paul. For Paul, glory was still to be
fully realised for the believer (2 Cor 4:17-18), but it was also powerfully
manifesting itself in the transformation of believers in Christ in the new
covenant of the Spirit (3:8, 10b, l i b , 18; cf. 1 Cor 2:8; 2 Cor 4:4). 44 But
an equally intriguing dimension of this inscription is the outburst of
"glory" language in honour of a local benefactor in the Augustan age of
grace. Do we see here evidence for the pursuit of "glory" continuing in the
traditional manner in the southern city-states of the Italian peninsula?
The question is an important one because the opportunistic careerist,
Cornelius Gallus, had come to a tragic end for not giving Augustus suffi­
cient glory in recounting his own military exploits as Caeasar s praefectus in
Egypt in 29 BC. 4 5 In the case of Kleanax, however, any possibility of mis­
understanding is retrieved when we learn that he sacrificed oxen to Augus­
tus, his two sons Gaius and Lucius, and "to the other gods." 46 The "god-like"
status of Augustus as the world-benefactor, along with his heirs, is the
symbolic universe in which local benefactors and soldiers now operated. 47
Thus cultic and epigraphic recognition of the dynastic rule of the Julian
"super-patron" is given due recognition and is assiduously promoted by
the local elites for all the political, cultic and economic advantages it
brought to city-states in the Greek East and in the Latin West. 48
Fourth, we possess a series of seven decrees from 144 AD onwards call­
ing the attention of the Roman ruler Antoninus Pius to the philanthropies
of Opramoas of Rhodiapolis. 49 In the decree cited in IGR 3. 739 Cols. XIX
/.85-XX /.13, the regular session of the Lycian League commends Opra­
moas to Antoninus Pius, with considerable civic pride, for his erection of
numerous public works after the disastrous earthquake of 142-143 AD. 5 0
While the League carefully reciprocates the beneficence of Opramoas with
its decree, it even more carefully underscores through the use of the lan­
guage of "glory" that the generosity of Opramoas was motivated by the
divine recognition accorded their benefactor in the rescripts or responses
of Imperator Antoninus Pius. 51 As the decree explains,
. . . (and whereas), when the Imperator graciously approved him because of his policy,
and by the very nature of his reply was urging the rest of the magistrates to cultivate
similar zeal (εις την όμοίαν επαγόμενου προθυμίαν) and even encouraged (Opra­
moas) to augment his desire for virtue—for this is something the praise (έπαινος) of a
great king can accomplish who stimulates the minds of those who press on toward the
finest glory (έπί δόξαν άρίστην) and makes the cities proud of good men—(and when
he was successful to such an extent) that Opramoas, exalted as he was with the (Imper­
ator s) most divine replies (ταις θειοτάταις), still continues to demonstrate all the
generosity that is within him and persists in adding annually to his gifts and improves
the cities with his public works, in return (άνθ' [ων]) the province once again, and
especially in view of what he is now doing and of what he has done in adorning every
city with exceeding care, considered it right to bear appropriate witness to him in the
current deliberative session of the League (and to communicate this) in the presence
of our Lord Imperator Caeasar Titus Aelius Hadrianus Antoninus P i u s —
Again, it is evident in the imperial age that "glory" is acquired and legiti­
mated in the cursus honorum ("course of honour": i.e. a magisterial career)
through the summons and sponsorship of the Roman ruler, notwithstand­
ing the independent wealth of millionaires like Opramoas. In saying this,
I am not denying that inscriptions honouring aristocratic families for their
benefactions in gymnasia and in the local cults become more and more
frequent under the early Empire, as J. Pouilloux correctly observes. A
statue dedicated to Athanias of Thespies in the first century AD, for exam­
ple, praises the gymnasiarch for the fact that he "has exercised a political
53
life with great success and very gloriously (ενδοξότατα)." But, typically,
he also holds the position of "agonothete of Mouseia Augusta and of
54
Erotideia Caesareia," that is, the officer who presided over the games of
his city sponsored by Augustus and Caesar. In other words, the civic "glory"
of Athanias, a wealthy aristocrat of Thespies, is inextricably interwoven
with the networks of imperial patronage and propaganda that replaced
the ruler cult in the eastern Mediterranean city-states. The wealthy elites
of the Greek East took advantage of enhancing their own honour and
power because of their indirect connection—even though at considerable
remove—with the Roman ruler. 55
However, given that the honorific inscriptions universally present the
transactions between benefactors and their dependents in a positive light,
it would be worthwhile to see whether the same picture of δόξα emerges
in a situation where there are obvious tensions in the benefaction system
in the first century AD. We turn therefore to the first-century evidence of
the Rhodian oration of Dio Chrysostom. 56
In this section we will not discuss Dio Chrysostom s three orations entitled
Περί δόξης (Or. 66-68) because they uniformly dismiss "opinion" or "rep­
utation" (δόξα) as a matter of indifference from a Cynic point of view.
Dios stance was inimical to Roman nobles' quest for gloria and is far
removed from the highly positive tone of Pauls "glory" terminology in
2 Corinthians 8:19, 23. Indeed, throughout his orations Dio endorses,
with few exceptions, the negative evaluation of glory belonging to the
57
Greek ethical tradition.
However, we must not forget that Dio Chrysostom (AD 40-110)
belonged to a prominent family famous for its benefactions to Prusa, the
city in which the family lived. Dio continued in the family tradition of
euergetism, procuring benefits for Prusa from the Roman rulers because of
the privileged position that he enjoyed as a member of the provincial elite
in northwest Asia Minor. Thus Dio would have been sensitive to the impor­
tance of δόξα in the world of honour in antiquity. 58 This is particularly
evident in the Rhodian oration (Or. 31) where Dio is addressing the prob­
lem of the recycling of old statues with new inscriptions at Rhodes for the
honouring of the city's crop of new benefactors. 59 In this oration a more
positive evaluation of the lasting contribution that glory makes to civic life
begins to emerge.
Throughout his oration, Dio makes the point that the duplicitous
actions of the citizens of Rhodes violated the reciprocation of honour that
animated the ancient benefaction system. When gratitude is properly allo­
cated to benefactors, it spawns worthy favours for the recipients (Or. 31.7).
The Rhodians, however, are robbing benefactors—past and present (Or.
31.12)—of their honour (31.8-9). Their actions in removing the original
honorific inscriptions accompanying the public statues not only deprives
the original benefactors of honour but also dishonours them by blighting
their illustrious career with the damnatio memoriae reserved for tyrants and
the treasonous (Or. 31.27-31). Moreover, in acting with mockery towards
the benefactors of the past, the Rhodians fill their current benefactors with
suspicion regarding the longevity and genuineness of their proposed hon­
ours. In the face of such dishonourable ingratitude on the part of the Rho­
dians and their denial of honourable benefactors of rightful recompense
(Or. 3136-37, 65), there is only one conclusion to be drawn:
Therefore, the man who courts the person who is present, but slights his former friend,
and having forgotten the service this friend has rendered, places the highest impor­
tance on the hoped-for benefit from the other—do you not know the term that is
applied to him? Is such a man not called a toady elsewhere? Is he not considered
ignoble, a man not to be trusted? 60
Dio concludes that the Rhodians, living under the hegemony of Rome,
had no new opportunities to establish world leadership other than to show
themselves better than the rest of the world by properly honouring their
benefactors (Or. 161-162). 61
An interesting sidelight to the Rhodian oration is the way that Dio
resorts to the language of "glory" throughout the speech to drive home the
ingratitude of the Rhodians towards their benefactors. The sacrifices for
the city made by the benefactors of the past demands that their name be
heralded and that they also receive "some other honour" (Or. 31.16: δόξαν
τινά). Fortune provides cities with men who advanced to "glory" and
power precisely because they were jealous of honour and regarded their
fame as more precious than life itself (Or. 31.20: εις δόξαν). Thus the
proper honouring of such men is the debt they were owed by their ances­
tors and consequently they are "the glory of the city" in the present (Or.
31.62: ή δόξα της πόλεως). Even in the case of the uninscribed statues of
demigods, "their glory has remained and time has guarded their fame"
{Or. 31.92: ή δόξα). As far as the reciprocation of the beneficence of mor­
tals, honorific statues are erected because of the benefactor's "distinguished
achievement" and his nobility {Or. 31.94: δια το δόξαι). Thus the Rhodi-
ans should keep their eyes on "their own reputation" and the proud posi­
tion of their city {Or. 31.126: την εαυτών δόξαν). They are to avoid the
mistake of other Greek cities who have blotted out their "ancient glory"
{Or. 31.158: την πάλαιαν δόξαν) or those individuals who have destroyed
"the glory of their own family" (31.159: την όλη ν δόξαν).
Finally, importantly for the imperial context, Dio Chrysostom com­
ments twice on the rule of Nero in relation to the world of honour in the
mid first-century. First, as a salutary reminder to the Rhodians of the
importance of maintaining proper rituals of honour, Dio points out that
even Nero competed for honour in the highly regarded games of the Elean
festival (Dio Cassius 64.18; Suetonius, Ner. 24). 6 2 As Dio elaborates {Or.
31.110-111),
But if it had been (the Elean) custom to crown all the potentates that came to the
spectacle, what emulation would the crown any longer have aroused and what sort of
glory (ποίαν ετι δόξαν) would it have won? O n the contrary, they say that the Eleans
do not even open the letters written by those who would recommend a particular
athlete, until he has competed.
Second, Nero, in contrast to the Rhodians, did not remove any of the
statues of Rhodes from their sites. This stood in sharp contrast to Nero's
policy elsewhere of taking public objects from other cities for the embel­
lishment of the Roman sacred places {Or. 31.149-141). The great number
of Rhodian statues, Dio wryly comments, brought the Rhodians "renown
of another sort" {Or. 31.149: δόξαν ύμιν έτέραν): namely, the respect and
friendship of the ruler. As Dio quips {Or. 31.150), "So then, when the
Romans and Nero guarded your possessions so scrupulously and esteemed
them inviolate, shall you yourselves fail to protect them?"
Thus, according to Dio Chrysostom, scrupulous attention to honorific
rituals and the pursuit of δόξα would ensure the smooth operation of the
reciprocity system that had historically provided beneficence for the Greek
city-states in the eastern Mediterranean. The system, if properly main­
tained, would continue to flourish by virtue of the connections of the
aristocratic elite with the ruler under the Roman hegemony. In this regard,
it was ironical that even Nero, "the most immoderate of the rulers" {Or.
31.150: ό των βασιλέων σφοδρότατος), understood better than the Rhodi-
ans the importance of the traditional quest for glory for their city.
However, there was definitely an underside to the world of honour and
the cultivation of the ruler s patronage in the Greek East in the first cen­
tury, as Nero's plundering of the honorific monuments of other cities dem­
onstrated {Or. 3.148). In this instance, it is also important to recognise
Dio's rhetorical intention: he is shaming the Rhodians into abandoning
their dishonourable behaviour towards their benefactors by presenting
Nero, quite unexpectedly, as a positive exemplum of the honourable pur­
suit of glory. But, elsewhere, Dio was consistently critical of Nero's excesses
and his insatiable lust for fame {Or. 3.134; 21.6, 9-10; 47.14-15; 66.6;
71.9).
In our next section (§4), before we discuss the text of 2 Corinthians
8:23 (§5), we will investigate the evidence of the imperial period to see
whether the traditional republican quest for glory became increasingly
constricted under the rule of the Roman world-benefactors.
The final context to be explored in our discussion of Pauls language of
"glory" in 2 Corinthians 8:23 is the concentration of "glory" in the house
of the Julio-Claudian rulers. This political innovation was an unexpected
outcome of Augustus' victory over the Roman nobility and their clients. It
was inaugurated by Augustus' triumph at Actium (31 BC) and brought
inexorably to completion by means of the unprecedented powers pressed
upon Augustus by the Senate and People from 27 BC onwards, notwith­
standing his personal disquiet about the accolades and Imperium proposed
63
for him. This concentration of glory in the household of the ruler under­
mined the aristocracy of merit previously confined to the houses of the
Roman nobles {nobiles) and to the occasional "new man" {novus homo)
who achieved the consulship for the first time in his family. 64
During the republican era the powerful houses of the Roman nobles
possessed glory by virtue of one or several of their forebears achieving the
consulship and by their descendants equalling or surpassing their ancestral
glory by further magistracies and military victories. According to Sallust,
the perpetual glory of the family ancestors motivated later generations in
the republic to equal the fame of their illustrious forbears by new deeds in
service of the state {lug. 4.5-6):
I have often heard that Quintus Maximus, Publius Scipio, and other eminent men of
our country, were in the habit of declaring that their hearts were set mightily aflame
for the pursuit of virtue as they gazed upon the masks of their ancestors. They of
course did not mean to imply that the wax or the effigy had any such power over them,
but rather that it is the memory of great deeds that kindles in the breasts of noble men
this flame that cannot be quelled until they by their own prowess have equalled the
fame {fama) and glory {gloria) of their forefathers. 65
In another text, Sallust explains how ancestral glory is the yardstick for
evaluating the progress of the family descendants in achieving virtue {lug.
85.23):
. . . the glory of the ancestors {maiorum gloria) is, as it were, a light shining upon their
posterity, suffering neither their virtues nor their faults to be hidden. 66
Cicero, like Sallust, believes that the evaluation of posterity drives the
Roman preoccupation with glory. As Cicero states (Cat. 3.11.26), "In your
minds I wish all my triumphs, all my decorations of honour, the monu-
ments of my glory (monumenta gloriae), the badges of my renown, to be
stored and laid up." As with Sallust, gloria is for Cicero more the product
of a disciplined striving than the allocation of fortune:
For when I was burning with a desire for glory (laudis), he first encouraged me to hope
that virtue without any assistance from fortune could, by means of labour and perse-
verance, arrive at the object of its desires. 67
Indeed, glory had to be defended in the present if it was to remain a potent
force for the future fame of ones house. As Cicero advises his brother,
Quintus Tullius, in a brief comparison of their careers towards the end of
60 BC,
And now that fortune has assigned the management of public affairs to me among
magistrates in the city, and to you in a province, if I yield to no man in the part that I
have to play, see to it that you excel all others in yours. At the same time bear in mind
that we are not striving after a glory {gloria) that remains to be won, and that we but
hope to win, but fighting for a glory already ours—a glory which it was not so much
our object to gain in the past, as it is to defend in the present. 68
However, with the triumph of the Julian house over its political rivals, the
heated competition for ancestral glory among the traditional noble houses
at Rome waned because Augustus, as the world benefactor and supreme
general, rapidly became the embodiment of glory and virtue in the Roman
state. 69 The dependence of the first-century nobiles ("nobles") upon the
Julio-Claudian rulers for their advancement within the traditional cursus
honorum ("course of honour": i.e. a magisterial career) would have been
increasingly obvious to all. 70 The old days when young nobles automati-
cally inherited substantial reserves and the political support of clients because
of the ancestral glory of their households were long since gone. 71 The ruler,
with his unparalleled wealth, had swallowed up as his personal clients the
traditional support base of the Roman nobles.
Literary texts and the eulogistic inscriptions chart with clarity this monop-
olisation of glory by the ruler in the first century AD. In what follows, we
will focus on how the language of "glory" is initially applied to Julius Cae-
sar and Augustus and then subsequently to the Julio-Claudian descen-
dants. First, Ovid speaks of Augustus' house at Rome as possessing "eternal
glory" {aeternum decus) because it was continually adorned with the trium-
phal wreaths of oak and laurel {Tristia 3.1.35-46, esp. /.46). Later in the
same work, Ovid petitions Augustus for deliverance, addressing him as
"you glory (decus), you image of a fatherland {imago patriae)" {Tristia
5.2.49). Further, after thanking Cotta Maximus for his gift of a silver
medallion, Ovid looks at the portraits of Augustus, Livia and Tiberius
embossed on its surface and bursts out in an impassioned petition to the
princeps (Ex Ponto 2.8.20-26):
As I gaze on him (Augustus) I seem to look on Rome, for he embodies the likeness of
the fatherland {patriae). Am I wrong or do the features of his portrait show anger
against me? Is his form somehow grim and threatening? Spare me, you who are might-
ier in your virtues (maior virtibus) than the measureless world, check the reins of your
just vengeance. Spare me, you imperishable glory of our age (saecli decus indelebile
nostri), because of your own care.
Here we are witnessing a significant shift in the conventions of the repub-
lican past. With the triumph of the Julian house over the traditional houses,
the political competition among the nobiles for ancestral glory becomes
progressively stymied by the concentration of glory around Augustus and
the accolades continuously given him. Significantly, in two of the Ovid
texts above, the use of the language of "eternity" indicates that glory resides
permanently in the house of Caesar alone. 72
Second, Valerius Maximus adopts the same "glory" language when chart-
ing the ascendancy of the Julio-Claudian house over its rivals. Valerius
refers to Augustus' apotheosised father, Caesar, in the language of glory:
"let us set forth the bright glory of the stars (siderum clarum decus), as for-
merly of arms and the gown, the divine Julius, surest image of true valour"
(3.2.19). 73 Similarly, he speaks crisply of the civic crown awarded to Augus-
tus in January 27 BC (Res Gestae 34.2) in these terms: "With it the door-
posts of the August dwelling triumph in eternal glory (sempiterna gloria
triumphant)" (2.8.7).
Third, this new way of speaking about ancestral glory was not confined
to the imperial poets of the Latin West. The eulogistic inscriptions of the
eastern Mediterranean basin convey of the same rituals of honour to the
ruling house. An Ephesian inscription (I. Ephesos VII 2 3801) speaks of
hymnodists gathering from all Asia to hymn Augustus Tiberius Caesar on
his birthday at Pergamum. The hymnodists "complete a magnificent work
for the glory of the guild (εις την [της συνόδου δόξ]αν), singing of the
Sebastos house and discharging sacrifices to the Sebastoi gods and keeping
feasts and festivals." Significantly, the guild of hymnodists at Pergamum
had acquired its own "glory" by virtue of its association with the Caesars
through its hymn-singing on imperial calendar days. 74
More importantly, in a decree of Mytilene honouring the benefactions
of Augustus, the city acknowledges that the honours returned to the ruler
are vastly inferior when one remembers the enormity of the glorious hon­
ours that the ruler possesses as a "godlike" being. Consequently, Augustus
should ponder on his own self-esteem because it never is possible to match those hon­
ours which are insignificant both in accidence and in essence to those who have
attained heavenly glory (τοις ουρανίου τετε[υ]χόσι δόξης) and possess the eminence
and power of gods. But if anything more glorious than those provisions is found here­
after the enthusiasm and piety of the city will not fail in anything that can further
deify him. 7 5
Fourth, the language of "glory" is extended to the successors of Augustus
and their immediate family circle. In an ode commemorating the deeds of
Augustus' stepson Tiberius, Horace highlights how Fortune had given
Augustus unprecedented military glory since his victory at Actium:
... the troops, the plan, the favouring gods provided all by thee. For on the self-same
day that suppliant Alexandria opened her harbours and her empty place to thee, pro­
pitious Fortune, three lustrums later, brought a happy issue to the war and bestowed
fame and hoped-for glory upon deeds wrought in fulfilment of thy commands
{laudemque et optatum peractis impertís decus adrogavii) 7 6
In an intriguing text, Valerius Maximus (4.3.3) asserts that the glory of the
Claudian branch of the imperial house—embodied in Drusus Germani-
cus, Livias son by a previous marriage—equalled the prestige of the Julian
rulers:
It is well known that Drusus Germanicus, the particular glory of the Claudian family
{eximiam CUudiae familiae gloriarti), his country's rare ornament, and, best of all, one
who by the grandeur of his achievements, in the perspective of his years, marvellously
matched the Augusti, his stepfather and his brother...
In a highly flattering gambit to the young Nero, Seneca (Clem. 1.1.) plays
down the reigns of Augustus and Tiberius, positing that Nero was the
only model worthy of imitation in his principate. In saying this, Seneca
deliberately ignores Augustus' iconic legacy of imitation to posterity (Res
Gestae 8.5). Although Seneca does not employ the language of glory in this
instance, the imitation of ancestral glory is totally bypassed by the philoso-
pher because exemplary virtue had found its incarnation in Nero as the
new world benefactor:
Thanks are rendered to you; no human being has ever been so dear to another as you
are to the people of Rome—its great and lasting blessing. But it is a mighty burden
that you have taken upon yourself; no one today speaks of the deified Augustus or the
early years of Tiberius Caesar, or seeks for any model he would have you copy than
yourself {quod te imitan velit, exemplar extra te quaerit); the standard for your princi-
pate is the foretaste you have given. This would indeed have been difficult if that good-
ness of yours were not innate but only assumed for a moment. 77
Finally, even at the end of the first century, the Latin poet Martial employs
the "glory" terminology of the Flavian ruler Domitian: "Caesar, the world s
sure salvation, glory of the earth (terrarum gloriò), whose safety is our
assurance that the great gods exist" (Martial, Spect. 2.91). The triumph of
the glory of the Caesars over the glory of the old famous republican houses
was now complete.
What, then, are the implications of our investigation of the documen-
tary and literary sources (§2-4) for the benefaction context of δόξα Χρίστου
in 2 Corinthians 8:23?
In 2 Corinthians 8:20, Paul states that he intends that "no one should
blame us about this generous gift that we are administering." Irrespective
of whether 2 Corinthians is a unity or not, it is clear that Paul's financial
policy had become a highly contentious issue for the Corinthians. Pauls
opponents at Corinth, as depicted in 2 Corinthians 10-13, made much of
the (so-called) irregularities of the apostles financial arrangements. Paul
had loved the Corinthians less, so the opponents insinuated, by accepting
payment from the Macedonians, preferring instead to work as a slavish
artisan rather than accept the generous Corinthian offer of remuneration
reserved for eloquent sophists (2 Cor 11:7-11; 12:14-15). The apostle to
the Gentiles was deceptive, either craftily pocketing the funds of the Jeru­
salem collection for himself or, alternatively, unfairly imposing his demands
on those whom he had recently rebuffed (2 Cor 12:16-18). 78 Both sides of
this tense debate—the Corinthians (2 Cor 12:13a, 16) and Paul (12:13b,
15)—launched their charges and counter-charges with relentless precision.
We might legitimately ask who within the Corinthian house churches
launched this concerted attack against Paul. Undoubtedly, members of the
Corinthian elite were educated in rhetoric (1 Cor 1:26: ου πολλοί σοφοί),
as well as in forensic skills (1 Cor 6:2, 5). 7 9 They felt that Paul's rhetorical
delivery in person (2 Cor 10:1b, 9-11; 11:6a) was inferior to the oratory of
his more gifted opponents (2 Cor 3:1-3; 10:12; 11:4-6, 12-13, 20-23a;
12:11-12; cf. 1 Cor 1:20; 2:1-5; 4:20). 80 In their view, Paul's refusal either
to charge fees like the sophists or to accept payment from the Corinthians
(1 Cor 9:1-18; 2 Cor 11:7-9; 12:14-16) indicated that he was a rank ama­
teur in rhetoric. 81 The collection, in the view of some of the wealthy patrons
of the house churches, was in reality a subterfuge for Pauls funding of
himself and his retinue, topped up with gifts from the Macedonian churches
(2 Cor 11:9; cf. Phil 4:10-20). Moreover, in terms of ancient gift-giving
rituals, 82 Paul had declared enmity against the Corinthian patrons by refus­
ing their sponsorship, with the result that Paul faced recalcitrance regard­
ing the finalisation the collection (2 Cor 9:3-5). Somehow, Paul had to
ensure that his delegates to the Corinthians would be readily accepted
(2 Cor 8:24). 83 Thus he pursued a series of sophisticated rhetorical strate­
gies to persuade the Corinthians.
First, as noted (§1), Pauls reference to the delegates accompanying the
Jerusalem collection as the δόξα Χρίστου (2 Cor 8:23) is probably influ­
enced by allusions to the LXX Isaianic motif of the pilgrimage of the
nations to Zion, the place where Gods glory resided. There is also an
explosion of "glory" language in the LXX Isaianic "Servant of the Lord"
traditions. Here Paul is asserting that the delegates reflect the glory of the
risen Christ, the suffering and vindicated "Servant of the Lord," in their
administration of the collection for the poor. As Gentile delegates, they
also bear a position of honour that was well known in the first-century
world: namely, the official delegate who carried out an ambassadorial role
upon behalf of a dignitary (§1 n. 11 supra; cf. 2 Cor 5:20). Paul, then,
appeals to venerable Jewish and Graeco-Roman motifs to enhance the
glory of his delegates so that the recalcitrant Corinthians might finalise
their preparations for the Jerusalem collection (2 Cor 9:2-5) and accept
unreservedly the delegates of the Gentile churches sent to administer the
funds (8:24).
Second, as noted (§1 n. 21 supra), the dominant semantic field appealed
to in 2 Corinthians 8 is the language of benefaction. In addition to the two
uses of "glory" terminology (2 Cor 8:19 [την [αύτοΰ] του κυρίου δόξαν];
8:23 [δόξα Χρίστου]), there are eight other instances of benefaction lan­
guage employed in the pericope of 2 Corinthians 8:16-24, as well as the
overflow of the language of "grace" in 2 Corinthians 8-9 more generally.
While these occurrences have been widely discussed, only one commenta­
tor (EW. Danker) has referred to the benefaction context of δόξα. We have
seen that φιλοδοξία was used regularly in late Hellenistic inscriptions to
denote the love of personal fame that motivated ancient benefactors in
antiquity, 84 whereas δόξα referred to the glory accorded to the benefactors
city or family through the demonstration of munificence (§2).
By the first century AD, however, glory was avidly sought by the aristo­
cratic elites in the provinces of the Greek East (§2) and by associations
such as the Asian guild of hymnodists (I. Ephesos VII 2 3801), with a view
to cultivating the patronage of the Julio-Claudian benefactors (§4).
Deflected glory arose from one s association with the ruler whereas in the
past it was primarily the result of individual achievement or ancestral
inheritance. Therefore the patronage of the ruler was scrupulously acknowl­
edged in inscriptions honouring the local aristocracy and the benefactors
of religious associations, as well as in inscriptions eulogising the protégés of
the Caesars within the senatorial, equestrian and military ranks (§2 n. 47).
Some of the Corinthian believers, who were patrons of the house churches,
probably belonged in the lower to upper echelons of the provincial aristoc-
racy (1 Cor 1:26: ου πολλοί δυνατοί, ου πολλοί ευγενείς). 85
Indeed, the ruler was well aware that such opportunities for glory among
the aristocratic elites of local cities—through civic posts such as the priest
of the imperial cult, agonothetes and gymnasiarchos—enhanced the stability
of provincial rule and reciprocated the services of the loyal clients of Rome.
This is evident in the rescripts or responses of Imperator Antoninus Pius
honouring the benefactor Opramoas (§2), even though the Lycian League
was also indirectly enhancing its own status before the ruler through its
famous benefactor. Dio Chrysostom's shock over the Rhodian abandon­
ment of the rituals of glory in a world of honour also illustrates the line
of continuity that still existed between the present and the past as far as
the quest for glory under the Roman hegemony, despite its occasional
infringement by Nero (§3). Notwithstanding, civic glory was increasingly
determined by the opportunities provided in the cursus honorum through
imperial patronage (§2). So far, then, Paul's public eulogy of his delegates
as δόξα Χρίστου (2 Cor 8:23) demotes the status of great man in
antiquity—especially the civic benefactor—and, concomitantly, elevates
Christ's servants as ambassadors of the risen Lord of glory. 86 This is made
all the richer by Paul's interweaving of allusions to the LXX Isaianic "glory"
references, noted above, with the language of Graeco-Roman diplomacy.
But the critical issue that New Testament scholarship has overlooked in
relation to verse 23 is the rapid concentration of "glory" language in the
ruler and his family in the first-century AD (§4). Surely Paul, sensitive to
the δόξα traditions of Second Temple Judaism (Rom 9:4; 2 Cor 3:11-18),
would have reacted as a first-century Jew to this development, as much as
he did to the inflated boasting of the great man in antiquity (Rom 3:23:
87
ύστεροΰνται της δόξης του θεοΰ; cf. 3:27; 4:2; 1 Cor 1:27-31)? In employ­
ing the phrase δόξα Χρίστου (2 Cor 9:23), Paul implicitly confronts the
Corinthians with a choice between the "glory" of two houses and their
dependents. There is the household of Caesar, the ruler of which was the
world benefactor of the clients of Rome and who sponsored the local pro­
vincial elites, including those at the Roman colony of Corinth. Conversely,
there is the house of David, the messianic Son of which (2 Cor 1:19;
5:16b) had poured out all his reserves in becoming the soteriological bene­
factor of fallen humanity (5:18-19, 21; 8:9). This "impoverished" benefac­
tor established local communities of beneficence that demanded no
reciprocation (2 Cor 9:7) other than that the "cycle of grace" should be
returned in thanksgiving to the glory of God (9:13-15: v. 13: δοξάζοντες
τον θεόν). 88 The more abundantly this selfless giving occurred within the
Corinthian house churches contributing to the collection, the richer they
would be in their apprehension of their impoverished benefactors soterio­
logical benefits, 89 the wealth of the ministries he offers, 90 and his capacity
to meet the needs of the destitute. 91 It is in this process of "impoverish­
ment" and "enrichment"—an expression of Pauls "dying and rising" in
Christ 9 2 —that we see the outworking of the δόξα Χρίστου in social rela­
tions, inside and outside the house churches, across the economic, cul­
tural, ethnic and geographic divide of the Roman empire.
In 2 Corinthians 8:19 (την [αύτοΰ] του κυρίου δόξαν) and 8:23 (δόξα
Χρίστου), therefore, Paul dismisses the glory of the house of the Caesars,
with its networks of grace for provincial clients, and its reciprocation of
praise for the ruler. Instead, Paul establishes a "counter-imperial" network
of beneficence in the form of a collection for the poor at Jerusalem organ­
ised by the Gentile churches in the Greek East (2 Cor 8:19a, 24b). This is
reinforced by Paul's transfer of the traditional virtues accorded to the bene­
factor in the eulogistic inscriptions (e.g. σπουδή, προθυμία, πρόνοια, δόξα
and their cognates) to the ministry of his co-workers in Christ (§1). Sig­
nificantly in terms of the first-century imperial context (§4), all glory is
now redirected to Christ (2 Cor 8:19, 23) and the Father (9:13). Christ's
ambassadors are also appropriately honoured for their service of the gospel
(2 Cor 8:16, 18,22-23).
In this radical reshaping of the ancient benefaction system, the apostle
pinpricks the self-sufficiency of Corinthian elite, imbued as they were with
the eulogistic benefaction culture of the Caesars and its inherent obliga­
tions, and confronts them with an infinitely richer tradition of glory. This
ministry of glory had been inaugurated by God in the history of Israel
(Rom 9:4: ή δόξα; 2 Cor 3:7: έγενήθη έν δόξη; 3:11: δια δόξης) and had
paradoxically found its full revelation in the shame of the cross (1 Cor 2:8:
τον κύριον του της δόξης). From this inauspicious and dishonourable
beginning emanated the infinitely more glorious ministry of the Spirit and
righteousness, 93 with a view to the final transformation upon the believers
arrival in the glory to come. 94 Consequently, in the present age, Paul locates
the true identity of believers, as δόξα Χρίστου, in their Lords example of
selfless service of the weak and poor as opposed to the privileged patronal
networks of the Roman ruler (1 Cor 8:11; cf. 9:22a; 2 Cor 8:9; cf. 11:29).
Believers would glorify Christ in the ordinary tasks of ministry in the same
way that the incarnate Christ had glorified his Father on earth as a lowly
servant and continued to do so now in heaven as the divinely vindicated
Lord of all (Phil 2:1 lb: εις δόξαν θεοΰ πατρός). Some of Corinthian elite
in the house churches, seduced by the idolatry associated with games of the
Federal Imperial Cult at the Isthmus in the early fifties (1 Cor 8:10; 10:14-
22), 95 needed to reassess where true glory resided (8:5-6). Undoubtedly, it
was for this reason that Paul highlighted the διακονία of the household of
Stephanus at Corinth and of Phoebe the προστάτις at Cenchrae (Rom
16:1-2 [v.l: διάκονον της εκκλησίας]; 1 Cor 16:15-16 [v. 15: είςδιακονίαν
τοις άγίοις έταξαν εαυτούς]). 96 Both patrons had abandoned the status of
being perceived as part of the Corinthian elite for the service that Christ s
glory demanded.
As a first-century Jew, Paul inherited in the LXX scriptures the rich tradi­
tion of the revelation of Gods δόξα to Israel. This found unexpected fulfil­
ment in the shame of the cross when the Lord of glory, as an impoverished
benefactor, enriched his dependents beyond their wildest dreams. The glo­
rious role of the Isaianic servant was transferred to the Spirit-filled com­
munities established by the grace of the risen Christ. The delegates of
Christ, representatives of the churches of the Gentile nations, incarnated
his glory in the administration of the Jerusalem collection. In the pericope
of 2 Corinthians 8:16-24, Paul magnifies its benefaction context by trans­
ferring to the delegates of the Gentile churches several of the virtues,
including δόξα, traditionally assigned to benefactors in the eastern Medi­
terranean honorific decrees. Although this language is conventional in its
eulogistic context, Paul's démocratisation of virtue throughout the body of
Christ strips the "great man" of antiquity of his superior moral status
within the city-state. Moreover, the glory is totally redirected to Christ and
returned to the Father in the thanksgiving of the Jerusalem believers for
the grace of their Gentile brethren.
Finally, what has been missed by modern scholarship is the imperial
context of glory. With the military triumph of Augustus over his foes at the
battle of Actium (31 BC), the old republican noble houses, which had
sought generation by generation to surpass the glory of their ancestors,
found themselves out-competed for clients in the public arena by the new
world benefactor. Opportunities for advancement in the cursus honorum
became increasingly the preserve of the house of the Caesars. The aristo-
cratic elites of the eastern Mediterranean competed for the ruler's patron-
age and endorsement of their civic projects and public rituals in honour of
him. It was therefore inevitable that the language of "glory" would concen-
trate in the ruler and his immediate family.
However, when Paul set up alternate communities of grace whose net-
works of beneficence spread across the eastern Mediterranean city-states, it
was likely that the gospel would be perceived by pro-Roman auditors to
have a "counter-imperial" thrust. Somewhat provocatively, all glory was
now redirected from the ruler to an impoverished benefactor crucified by
the Romans. Although Paul encouraged the early Christians to honour the
ruler as God's servant and to win his praise through civic benefactions
(Rom 13:3-4a, 7), God had trumped the world benefactor in a magnani-
mous demonstration of glory at the cross (1 Cor 2:8), extending the same
glory to his dependents as they served him and the destitute across the
empire (2 Cor 3:18; 8:19, 23). A new understanding of benefaction and
glory in the imperial age had begun to emerge.