The word έπιορκώ, old in Greek, occurs once in the NT, at Matt 5:33. The
general sense of the word, swear a fake oath, is clear enough, but the neces­
sary attempt to refine the meaning further has led to uncertainty, and our
major English lexicon of the N T remains undecided exactly which sense of
έπιορκώ is applicable. The cause is not so much the difficulty of the case as
something quite extraneous, the seemingly trivial matter of punctuation in
German and English. We begin there, before returning to a fresh examina­
tion of έπιορκώ and a resolution of the question.
In the German system of punctuating references in lexicons and indexes,
the stop is used to separate references in a list, and the comma to separate
parts of a reference, that is, chapter and verse. So, for example, we have in
Bauer 4 (1952): 1
γ η . . . 1. d Erdboden... Mt 13, 5. 8. 23. M k 4 , 5. 8. 20. 26. 28. 31. J 12, 2 4 ; . . .
This, when converted into the "English" system, becomes, and became in
2
BAG (1957):
γ ή . . . 1. *>//... M t 13: 5, 8,23; M k 4 : 5, 8, 20, 26, 28, 31; J 12: 2 4 ; . . .
It will be seen that stops (as in "5. 8. 23.") are converted into commas or
semi-colons ("5, 8, 23;"), and commas (as in "13, 5") into colons between
chapter and verse ("13:5"). But the stop in the German system may also
function as a true full stop at the end of a list of references, in the same way
as a full stop at the end of a sentence. The situation may arise, and fre­
quently does, when the two functions occur in proximity, and attention on
the part of the reader is needed to separate them and read the sentence
correctly. So, for example, in the following from Bauer 4 (1952):
θεάομαι... έθεάσατο τελώνην καθήμενον Lk 5, 27. Vgl. J 1, 38. AG 1, U . M . flgd.
δτι J 6, 5. M. Akk. u. ότι:...
Here the first stop (at "27.") is a true full stop at the end of a sentence, as
we deduce from the capital following in "Vgl." (Yet a third function of the
stop also appears here, as the indicator of an abbreviation.) But the next
stop (at "38.") is not a true full stop but a reference separator; and then (at
"11.") we have again a true full stop, as the following capital in "M." indi­
cates; similarly at "5.".
We can already see the potential for ambiguity. Now consider this
example, also from Bauer 4 (1952):
μακάριος... M. flgd. όταν M t 5, 11. Hs 5, 1,3 enthält nach der Lesung des Michi-
gan-Pap
d. Worte μακάριόν με ποιήσεις...
Here the two references in succession ("Mt 5, 11. Hs 5, 1, 3") could be
read as a list of two references, with the stop simply a reference separator.
One must read past the second reference to see that "Hs 5, 1,3" begins a
new sentence and that the stop before it is a true full stop. "Hs 5, 1, 3" is
the subject of the verb ("enthalt"), and new information is being supplied
that has nothing to do with Matt 5:11. BAG in their translation avoided
the trap and translated correctly:
μακάριος W όταν Mt 5 11 Ace to the reading of the Michigan Pap
3 contains the words μακάριόν με ποιήσεις
Hs 5, 1,
So far all is well. But we come now to a similar case where the ambiguity
has indeed given rise to misunderstanding.Matt 5:33 is as follows:
Πάλιν ήκούσατε δτι έρρέθη τοις άρχαίοις, Ουκ έπιορκήσεις, αποδώσεις δε τω
κυρίω τους όρκους σου
RSV Again you have heard that it was said to the men of old, 'You shall not swear
falsely, but shall perform to the Lord what you have sworn
In Bauer 4 (1952) this example of έπιορκώ was dealt with in the following
way:
έπιορκέω (seit Homer, auch Inschr Pap LXX Philo Test Ass 2, 6—Ζ Schreibg
έφιορκέω s Bl-D § 14 Anh ) Fut έπιορκήσω—1 fahch schworen, e falschen Eid
leisten (so meist)—2 e geschworenen Eid brechen, e Gelübde verletzen (Chrysipp Stoic
II63 Herodian 3,6, 7 Procop Soph , ep 61 1 Esr 1,46) Mt 5, 33 D 2, 3 sind beide
Bed mogi
There are two occurrences covered, the one in Matt, and another in
D[idache] 2:3, and both are placed in 2, followed by a comment. But to
which does the comment belong? Both examples, or only the second? On
the face of it, the lack of a stop after "1 Esr 1, 46)"—so closely must one
observe!—indicates that the reference to "Mt 5, 33." belongs with what
precedes, the stop at "33." being a real full stop not a reference separator,
and only the Didache reference "D 2, 3" is the subject of the comment
that both meanings are possible. If that is correct, Bauer took Matt 5:33 to
3
be definitely sense 2, while D 2:3 alone was regarded as in doubt.
When translated into English in BAG (1957), however, this came out
differently: the stop between "Mt 5, 33" and " D 2, 3" was read as a refer­
ence separator, with the result that both occurrences were said to be in
doubt:
έπιορκέω... 1. swear falsely, perjure oneself {so mostly).—2. break one's oath (Chrysipp.:
Stoic. II 63; Herodian 3, 6, 7; Procop. Soph., Ep. 61; 1 Esdr 1:46). In M t 5:33; D 2:3
both mngs. are poss. M-M.
In the English Bauer stream the entry continued unchanged into BAGD
(1979), 4 but a further development has occurred in the latest revision by
Danker. 5 BDAG (2000) reads:
έπιορκέω
1 to swear that someth. is true when one knows it is false, swear
faUely, perjure oneself the context favors this sense for D 2 3 in which malicious
speech about one's neighbor is castigated in various terms It is prob that also M t 5:33
belongs here, but 2 is favored by many
2 to fail to do what one has promised under oath, break one's oath (Il 19, 188
note the fut έπιορκήσω, Chrysipp Stoic II 63, 28, Herodian 3, 6, 7, Procop Soph ,
Ep 61, 1 Esdr 1 46) M t 5:33 (s 1 above) — D E L G s ν δρκος M-M T W
The reference to Matt 5:33 now appears under both senses, with a prefer­
ence expressed for sense 1; D 2:3 is also resolved by placing in sense 1. The
state of uncertainty in which the allocation of the examples stood in the
previous English edition prompted Danker, one might fairly suppose, to
attempt to resolve it. But the fact that the uncertainty could have origi­
nated in a misreading of the punctuation was lost to view.
Were Arndt and Gingrich right in their interpretation of Bauer's entry,
or did they fail to read the punctuation correctly? (It is very unlikely they
made a deliberate change.) 6 Are there any other clues to what Bauer really
intended? I believe there are, and they indicate that Arndt and Gingrich
slipped up. I will return to those clues at the end of this paper, but turn
now to a fresh look at έπιορκώ to settle the question of its meaning in
Matt 5:33 in the light of evidence elsewhere and the context here.
It is easy to confirm the correctness of the distinction between the two
senses of έπιορκώ recognised by Bauer, though this distinction is not made
in LSJ or most N T lexicons before Bauer. 7 At first it might be tempting to
see only one sense, a general one such as swear a false oath, applicable to all
cases. In some contexts, where the word is used without reference to any
particular situation, this general sense might still come into play. But in
most cases the contexts reveal markedly different situations. They divide
clearly into two, one in which the oath relates to a statement of fact, the
other to an oath about performing some future action. Recognition of two
lexical meanings is therefore justified, along the lines of Danker s defini­
tions in BDAG above, which might be restated as: 1. swear falsely to the
truth of a statement; 2. break ones sworn promise. I offer a brief survey of the
evidence, to establish these senses.
At the first occurrence of έπιορκώ in Greek, in Homer, //. 19.188,
Agamemnon agrees to swear a certain oath just proposed by Odysseus,
adding that in doing so he will not swear falsely:
ταΰτα δ' έγών έθέλω όμόσαι, κέλεται δε με θυμός,
ούδ' έπιορκήσω προς δαίμονος.
This I am willing to swear, and my heart bids me,
nor will I swear falsely before god.
The content of the oath that he is agreeing to swear is shown by Odysseus's
words in lines 175-6, namely, to swear to Achilles μη ποτέ της εύνής
έπιβήμεναι ήδέ μιγήναι, "that he never went into her [Briseiss] bed and
had intercourse with her." So this is clearly a case of swearing to the truth
of a statement, and έπιορκώ has sense 1 above (contrary to Danker's place­
ment under 2). 8
Another early occurrence, in Andocides, Myst. 98, shows the other situ­
ation. A lengthy oath is quoted (97-8), in which the oath-takers, in this
case all the Athenians, are to swear they will kill anyone who overthrows
the democracy and will take other steps to punish such a person. Trie oath
concludes with the customary formula, in which the oath-taker prays
... εύροκοΰντι μεν είναι πολλά καΐ αγαθά, έπιορκουντι δ'εξώλη αυτόν είναι και
γένος.
... for the one who observes his oath, that there may be many blessings, but for the one
who breaks his oath, that he and his family may be wiped out.
This clearly involves a promise to act in a certain way, and exemplifies
έπιορκώ in sense 2.
Other instances of both senses can readily be found in Classical and
later authors. It soon becomes apparent that the impression given in Bauer/
BAG(D) (but not BDAG) that sense 1 is the usual one ("so meist," "so
mostly") is not accurate: sense 2 is also quite frequent, certainly frequent
enough to rule out the idea that one sense was predominant. 9 It is also clear
that there are often cases in which a choice between the two senses cannot
be made, either because the context does not indicate which it is, or because
false swearing is spoken of in general terms. For the latter, the general
sense, swear a fake oath, which might be termed the "default" meaning, is
appropriate. In a general lexicon of Greek this would need to be placed as
sense 1, with the others as 2 and 3. A good example of the general sense is
seen in Aristophanes, Birds 1609:
ού γαρ μείζον ύμείς oi θεοί
ίσχύσετ' ην όρνιθες άρξωσιν κάτω;
νυν μεν γ' υπό ταις νεφέλαισιν έγκεκρυμμένοι
κύψαντες έπιορκοΰσιν υμάς oi βροτοί ·
Won't you gods have greater power if birds rule below?
As it is now, mortals, hidden under the clouds,
have their heads down swearing false oaths by you.
One other illustration of each of senses 1 and 2 will suffice. The former,
swear fahely to the truth of a statement, is seen in Xenophon, Apol. Socr. 24:
Άλλ', ώ άνδρες, τους μεν διδάσκοντας τους μάρτυρας ως χρή έπιορκοΰντας
καταψευδομαρτυρείν έμοΰ και τους πειθομένους τούτοις ανάγκη έστι πολλήν
έαυτοις συνειδέναι άσέβειαν καί άδικίαν ·
But, gentlemen, those who instructed the witnesses in how to perjure themselves by
bearing false witness against me and those who took their advice cannot fail to be
aware in themselves of great impiety and wrongdoing.
The other, break ones sworn promise, is clear in Plutarch, Comp. Demetr. et
Ant. 5.3:
ά τοίνυν έπιώρκησαν αμφότεροι και παρεσπόνδησαν, ό μεν Άρτάβαζον συλλαβών,
ό δε Άλέξανδρον άποκτείνας, Άντωνίω μεν έχει την πρόφασιν όμολογουμένην ·
άπελείφθη γαρ έν Μήδοις υπό Άρταβάζου και προεδόθη · Δημήτριον δ ε . . .
As regards then what they both did in violating oaths and breaking treaties, the one by
seizing Artabazus, the other by killing Alexander, for Antony there is a generally
accepted excuse: he was deserted in the midst of the Medes by Artabazus and betrayed;
10
but Demetrius...
Let us return to Matt 5:33. We need first to see what can be learnt from
the commentaries. One important fact emerges at once: the words ουκ
έπιορκήσεις, αποδώσεις δε τω κυρίφ τους όρκους σου are not an exact
quotation of any Old Testament passage, either as a whole or in part,
though their import can be located in numerous places. The UBS N T text
is misleading in printing the words in bold. 11 The closest verbal parallel is
to the second clause, at Ps 49:14 (MT 50:14) (άπόδος τώ ύψίστφ τας εύχάς
σου). The verb έπιορκώ occurs in the LXX only twice (1 Esd 1:46;
Wis 14:28), in contexts that have no resemblance to this one, and the
commandment in Exod 20:16 does not use this verb but reads ου
ψευδομαρτυρήσεις. It follows that no particular O T context needs to be
taken into account in determining the lexical meaning here: the context in
Matt 5:33 alone can be the determinant.
There has been much discussion of the possibly composite nature of
Matt 5:33-37. The current state of play can be seen in the major commen­
tary of Davies and Allison, where detailed argument and bibliography are
assembled. 12 It is suggested that 33a originally stood alone in v. 33, and
33b was added to it along with other additions to the unit. The possible
meanings of έπιορκώ and αποδώσεις τους όρκους σου are debated, but
become enmeshed in the attempt to reconstruct the process of composi­
tion. In the end the actual meaning of the words and how they fit together
remain strangely unfocused. I quote Davies and Allisons conclusion: "The
meaning of 5,33 would then be: 'You have heard that it was said to the
men of old, "All your oaths are to be true." ' " The same sort of obscurity
attends the treatment by Davies elsewhere, and by Luz, Goulder and Kil-
patrick. 13 Kilpatrick, on the basis of its meaning outside the NT, insists
that the second clause means "but thou shalt take thine oaths to the Lord,"
but does not say what he thinks ουκ έπιορκήσεις means or how the verse
works as a whole. To take the second clause in this way renders the verse
meaningless, as far as I can see. What can be meant by "you shall not swear
falsely but shall take your oaths to the Lord"?
More useful are the many commentators who attempt less and simply
point out that if the second clause relates to performance of promises, then
the meaning of έπιορκώ that fits is break ones sworn promise. For example,
Hill sums up succinctly: "The word epiorkeo means both 'commit perjury'
and 'break an oath'; the latter rendering fits more satisfactorily with what
follows." A tour of the question from the Biblical translators point of view
14
given in the handbook of Newman and Stine reaches the same conclusion.
We may digress briefly here to consider the question of principle raised
by the matter of a possibly composite text. What does the lexicographer do
where the text may have been compiled in stages and there is a possibility
of alternative meanings? As I see it, there can only be one answer: the lexi­
cographer has to work with the text that we now have and ignore hypo­
thetical reconstructions of the process of composition, otherwise the door
would be open to endless speculation and uncertainty. (This is a different
thing from dealing with ambiguity or word-play intended by the author.)
Our next step must be to settle what the second clause of 5:33 means,
given that this is open to dispute. The evidence for the expression άποδίδωμι
ορκον/-ους outside the N T indicates only the meaning "take/tender an
oath," as Kilpatrick said. Besides the four examples noted in Bauer since
1928 and repeated by Kilpatrick, I have found several more that confirm
this meaning. Noteworthy is one in Plutarch, filling the gap between the
Classical and much later evidence of IV-V AD. Though the evidence is not
abundant, it is enough to suggest, in the absence of any to the contrary,
that this was the standard meaning of the expression up to and after the
time of the NT. 1 5
But, as I have already indicated above, this meaning makes no sense
in the context of Matt 5:33. We must explore alternatives. There is one
ready to hand, if, instead of treating αποδώσεις τους όρκους σου as the set
expression, we break it into its parts. The evidence for άποδίδωμι as fulfil
(an obligation or promise), often with object εύχήν/-άς, is solid. Good
examples are Ps 49:14 quoted above, Deut 23:22 (έαν δε εΰξη εύχήν κυρίω
τω θεώ σου, ου χρονιεις άποδοΰναι αυτήν) and Rom 13:7 (άπόδοτε πασιν
τάς όφειλάς), to draw only on the LXX and NT. 1 6
There is equally good evidence that δρκος/-οι can mean sworn promise,
vow. Though the word primarily means simply oath of any kind, and
this continues to be its common meaning, it also develops the narrower
sense. The process can be seen beginning when the reference is to an oath
taken in support of a promise to act in a certain way. Consider Demos­
thenes 19.318:
εί μεν γαρ προσδέξαιτο Φωκέας συμμάχους και μεθ' υμών τους όρκους αύτοις
άποδοίη, τους προς θετταλούς και Θηβαίους όρκους παραβαίνειν ευθύς άναγκαιον
ην...
For if he [Philip of Macedón] were to accept the Phocians as allies and together with
you tender the oaths to them, he must at once violate his oaths with the Thessalians
and Thebans...
Philip s oaths in both instances relate to alliances, that is, they are promises
to treat the other party as friends and allies and not to do them harm. 17 The
first example of όρκους can still mean simply oath, though the reference is
to an oath in support of a promise. But it is a short step to a context in
which sworn promise is the lexical meaning, as in the second occurrence of
όρκους here, governed by παραβαίνειν. Others of a similar kind can read­
ily be found. So in Deut 7:8:
... διατηρών τον ορκον, δν ώμοσεν τοις πατράσιν υμών, έξήγαγεν κύριος υμάς εν
χειρί κραταιά
... keeping the promise which he swore to your fathers, the Lord brought you out with
a mighty hand
In the N T itself, we have an example such as Matt 14:9:
... και λυπηθείς ό βασιλεύς δια τους όρκους και τους συνανακειμένους έκέλευσεν
δοθηναι
... and though the king was sorry, because of the promise he had made with an oath
and the presence of the guests he commanded that it be given
And in Diodorus Siculus 10.9.1 (I BC):
'Ότι ό Πυθαγόρας προς τοις άλλοις παρήγγελλε τοις μανθάνουσι σπανίως μεν
όμνύναι, χρησαμένους δε τοις ορκοις πάντως έμμένειν και προς τέλος αγειν υπέρ
ων αν τις όμόση πραγμάτων...
[We are told] that Pythagoras in addition to his other instructions directed his pupils
rarely to swear an oath, but if they did use one, to abide by their oath totally and to
bring to completion the matter about which they had sworn.. . 1 8
All of these show the meaning sworn promise.
There is no difficulty in understanding δρκος/-οι as sworn promise where it
suits the context; and we have seen that άποδίδωμι can have the sense of
fulfil with a word such as "promise" as object. If these meanings give the
best sense, we are entitled to set aside the evidence for the meaning of
the combination elsewhere ("tender an oath") and trust the context of
Matt 5:33 to determine what is required. The linking δε between the two
clauses is crucial: they must be read together, and a contrast is indicated,
"you shall not d o . . . , but you shall do
" In that case the only workable
meaning of the second clause is "but you shall fulfil to the Lord your sworn
promises," and the first accordingly indicates the opposite action, "you
shall not break a sworn promise," i.e., έπιορκώ has sense 2 break ones sworn
promise.
Is there any alternative? I find it hard to see any that will work. If the
text had καί instead of δε, it would be possible to read the sentence as
containing two separate commands, and the first could be "you shall not
swear a false oath" (of any kind); the second would remain as before. But
this is to indulge in might-have-beens.
We come back finally to Bauer s opinion and the clues that might help
us to confirm his intention to place Matt 5:33 firmly under sense 2. They
are found in his entries for άποδίδωμι and δρκος. Under the first, Bauer
translates Matt 5:33 as "d. Eid halten," i.e., as rendered in BAG, "keep
oaths." Under δρκος his rendering is "dem Herrn d. Eidschwüre halten,"
BAG s "perform oaths to the Lord." These renderings show that Bauer inter-
preted the second clause, not as "you shall tender your oaths," but in the
way it is understood here, i.e., "you shall fulfil your sworn promises," which
in turn implies that he took the first clause to be "you shall not break a
sworn promise." Here is confirmation that Bauer s punctuation is to be read
as proposed above, not as Arndt and Gingrich read it: Matt 5:33 belongs
under sense 2 of έπιορκώ, and only the Didache example is doubtful. 19
We now know what Bauer intended. And Bauer was right, as our review
of the evidence has shown. But the reading of his intention has been led
astray by ambiguous punctuation for half a century.