It is now widely acknowledged 1 that at many points the Letter of James
alludes to, or paraphrases, the Jesus tradition. 2 James's method of allusion,
however, is very different from the citational methods witnessed in
Matthew and Lukes usage of Mark and Q, or in Pauls citations of the
Greek Bible, where the wording of the source text is preserved to a rela-
tively high degree, albeit with some notable exceptions. Rather than using
predecessor texts as sources to be edited lightly, as Matthew and Luke did
with Mark and Q, or quarrying the Septuagint for proof texts to buttress
arguments, as Paul did, James employs the Jesus tradition much as an ora-
tor might use Homer or Euripides or Theognis, not so much as a source
to be quoted as a resource for mimesis and paraphrase. James's use of the
Jesus tradition is highly allusive and offers an instance of aemulatio or rhe-
torical paraphrase. He freely elaborates, reconfigures, and adapts sayings
of Jesus to new rhetorical situations such that the ultimate source of the
saying is still recognizable, but much has been added, substituted, and
subtracted in the process of reframing. 3
Precisely because of James's highly adaptive method of allusion, we are
in a position to assess which aspects in the Jesus tradition James ignores,
which he privileges, which he develops, and how and in what directions
they are developed. In this paper I shall argue that in James's elaboration
of two Q sayings, we can see reflected philosophical ideals that we know
to have been current in certain forms of Hellenistic Judaism concerned
with the care and nurture of the soul. James's treatment of these sayings
effectively shifts their respective social registers from rural Palestine, con-
cerned with subsistence and social pressures, to the life of the educated
or semi-educated urban Diaspora, concerned with psychic processes and
psychagogy. This is a social register which was open to philosophical
discourse on soul formation known in particular from Stoicism of the
Roman period.
An example of James's elaboration of the Jesus tradition occurs in its
opening lines. The assertion, ει δε τις υμών λείπετοα σοφίας, αίτείτω παρά
του δίδοντος θεοΰ πάσιν απλώς και μη όνειδίζοντος, και δοθήσεται αύτώ
(1:5), is routinely held to be an allusion to Q 11:9. 4 Whether James here
relies on a pre-synoptic oral form, or the written form as we have it in Q,
or one of Q's successor documents need not detain us, at least in this con­
text. The saying was remarkably stable and was taken over verbatim from
Q by Matthew and Luke. James, however, has preserved only Q s the­
matic verb, αίτειν and the phrase και δοθήσεται αύτώ ύμίν from the first
part of Q 11:9. He simultaneously shortens and expands Q s saying, first
eliminating the redundant word pairs 'seek/find' and 'knock/open, and
then substantially qualifying αίτειν. This treatment of a predecessor source
is consistent with rhetorical procedures of the time, according to which
traditional materials could be expanded, extended, epitomized, or rephrased
in accordance with considerations of what is 'apt' (πρέπον, aptum): 5
Three features immediately stand out in James's elongation of Q 11:9a.
First, James elaborates on the nature of God who grants wisdom, under­
scoring the way in which God gives. This might be regarded as a conden­
sation and reframing Q11:10, which in Q takes the part of the petitioner
who, Q claims, may be confident in receiving what she requests. What is
implicit but unstated in Q—that God is generous and reliable—becomes
explicit in James in the compressed statement that God gives απλώς και
μη όνειδίζων. But this description is also related to the next part of
James's elaboration, since his focus on God's singleness and equanimity is
designed as a counterpoint to the double-minded and unstable petitioner
in w. 6-8.
A second aspect of James's redeployment of Q becomes clear when one
contrasts James with the larger context of Q. Q introduces its admonition
by the Lord's Prayer, and buttresses the 'ask-seek-knock' admonition
with an argument from the analogy of parental behaviour, leading to the
conclusion that God is the giver of αγαθά, good things. For Q these 'goods'
are subsistence ( Q 11:3, 10), debt relief ( Q 11:4a) and security from
πειρασμοί ( Q 11:4b). By contrast, the only good in question for James is
σοφία, although he will later insist that all good gifts are from God.
The naming of wisdom as the object to be sought above all other goods
is probably due to the immediately preceding admonition to "let endur­
ance have its perfect work, so that you might be perfect (τέλειοι) and
complete (ολόκληροι), lacking nothing" (1:4) For James, evidently, the
reception of σοφία is the means to achieve such perfection, and in this
respect James belongs to the same orbit as the Wisdom of Solomon and
4 Maccabees which likewise privilege the possession of wisdom (and the
benefits that flow from this), in particular as the way to endure adversity
and persecution. Wisdom features Solomon seeking wisdom above all
other things (Wis 8:5-6) because of the preeminence of wisdom in the
structure of things, while the encomium to Wisdom in chap. 10 cata­
logues the ways wisdom delivered Israelites from various troubles. Fourth
Maccabees treats σοφία as comprehending and encompassing the four
cardinal virtues of prudence, justice, courage, and moderation, which are
above all else to be sought and cultivated, in particular in the context of
persecution and severe testing. 7
Third, James treats in much detail the psychological conditions which
obstruct the reception of wisdom, depicting the disputer s 8 psyché as a
storm-tossed sea and declaring him an άνήρ δίψυχος and ακατάστατος.
As James's elaboration of Q 11:9-13 makes clear, the subject who wavers,
the άνήρ δίψυχος, not only will not receive anything from God, but is
'unstable in all his ways' (ακατάστατος εν πάσαις ταις όδοις αύτοΰ). The
cause of this instability is for James cognitive. The wavering man wrongly
supposes the source of temptation to be God rather than his own
έπιθυμίαι (1:13); and he is forgetful of what he has just seen (1:25) and
hence acts badly. The ideal petitioner, by contrast, 'reckons' (ήγήσασθαι)
testing to be joy (1:2); he 'knows' (γινώσκων) that the proving of faithful­
ness leads to endurance (1:3); he is not deceived (πλανάσθαι); he is quick
to hear but slow to speak and slow to react in anger (1:19); he can bridle
his tongue (1:26); and he receives the 'implanted λόγος' and hence rejects
vice(l:21). 9
In sum, James's adaptation of Q 11:9 refocused the saying by empha­
sizing disposition—God's disposition (and by inference the ideal peti­
tioner) as απλώς, and the disposition of the disputer as δίψυχος and
unstable. Elsewhere I have suggested that James's reformulation of the
Jesus tradition reflects a shift in the social location of the addressees from
the rural Palestinian environment of Q to a setting in an urban, diasporic
context. 10 The shift described here, from a focus on the concrete benefits
of subsistence and debt relief to the acquisition of σοφία, and from
homely analogies of parental behaviour to an insistence on interior dispo­
sition, is likewise consistent with a change in social location to an urban,
educated environment.
The particular constellation of ideas in Jas 1:5-8 suggests a context informed
by philosophical ideals, in particular popularized forms of an amalgam
of Platonism and Stoicism mediated through Hellenistic Judaism. I have
already suggested that the privileging of σοφία as the principal good to be
sought brings us close to the Wisdom of Solomon and 4 Maccabees. But
of course, the quest for σοφία is much broader than Hellenistic Judaism.
More telling is the contrast between the virtue of άπλότης and the vices of
διψυχία and ακαταστασία and the strong focus on disposition.
The importance of Singleness' as a virtue is well attested in the Testa­
ments of the Twelve Patriarchs, in particular the Testament oflssachar, whose
superscript is περί άπλότητος. While in Hellenistic Greek άπλότης often
refers to a simple rustic life, 11 the Testament of Issachar correlates rustic
simplicity (3.2; 4.3) with unswerving moral rectitude, which he epito­
mizes as άπλότης οφθαλμών (3.4; 4.6), a phrase that implies the integrity
of perception and cognition. Singleness excludes desire (έπιθυμειν) and is
an antidote against the spirits of deceit, envy, malice and perversion
(4.2-6). Elsewhere in the Testaments singleness is described as a mode of
cognition and is expressly contrasted with a pathological doubleness. For
example, the Testament of Benjamin (6.1-7) states:
1
The disposition (διαβούλιον) of the good man is not in the power of the deceit of
the spirit of Beliar, for the angel of peace guides his soul. 2 He does not look with
passion at corruptible things, nor gathers wealth for a desire of pleasure. 3 He does
not delight in pleasure; [he does not grieve for his neighbour]; he does not fill him­
self with luxuries, he is not deceived by the lifting up of eyes: the Lord is his portion.
4
The good disposition (το αγαθόν διαβούλιον) does not receive glory or dishonour
from people and it does not know any deceit, or lies, or fighting, or reviling; for the
Lord dwells in him and illumines his soul, and he rejoices towards all people always
5
The good mind (ή άγαθη διάνοια) does not have two tongues (δύο γλώσσας), of
blessing and cursing, of hybris and honor, of grief and joy, of quietness and distur­
bance (ταραχή), of hypocrisy and of truth, of poverty and of wealth, but it has a sin­
gle disposition (διάθεσις), uncorrupt and pure, concerning all people 6 It does not
have double sight nor double hearing (ουκ έχει ορασιν ουδέ άκοήν διπλήν), for in
everything which he does, or speaks, or sees, he knows that the Lord looks at his soul
7
And he cleanses his mind that he may not be condemned by people or by God
And (contrariwise) every work of Behar is twofold, (διπλούν) and possesses no single­
ness (ουκ έχει απλότητα)
The 'pure mind' (διάνοια καθαρά)—the subject of the Testament of
Benjamin—"perceives all rightly ' (πάντα βλέπει ορθώς, 3.2) and for that
reason also acts virtuously. For the Testament of Benjamin, the opposite of
the pure mind—the darkened mind—is not one that acts in a uniformly
evil way but instead one which acts in a contradictory or double way, a
sure sign of instability and mental disturbance. Testament ofAsher makes a
similar point, using the term διπρόσωπον:
Therefore my children, do not be double-faced (διπρόσωποι) like them, (showing)
goodness and vice, but cleave to goodness only, for God rests in it and men wish it
2
Flee from vice, destroying the Devd (τον διάβολον) 1 2 by your good works, for
those who are double-faced (oi διπρόσωποι) are not servants to God but to their
own desires (έπιθυμίαις), so that they may please Behar and men like themselves "
(TAsb 3 1-2)
It is sometimes urged that the Testaments presuppose a dualistic psychol­
ogy and a precursor of the rabbinic doctrine of the 11ΌΠ Ί1Γ and the
νΊΆ Ί 2 \ 1 3 Hollander and de Jonge dispute this, pointing out that although
T. Ash. 1.5, which speaks of "two διαβούλια in our breasts," has been
taken to imply a dualistic psychology, 14 this statement must be read in the
context of 1.6a, 8a:
If then the soul desires the good, every one of its actions are righteous... but if
the disposition (το διαβούλιον) inclines to evil every ones of its actions is evil.
[J. Ask 1.6a, 8a).
T.Jud. 20.1-3 is also relevant:
Know then my children, that two spirits are devoted (δύο πνεύματα σχολάζουσι) to
humankind, that of truth and that of deception. And in between (μέσον) is the spirit
of understanding of the mind, (whose property is) to incline to whichever it wishes
(ου εάν θέλη κλιναι). And the works of truth and of deceit are written on the breast
of mankind. {T.Jud. 20.1-3)
Hollander and de Jonge conclude that the psychology of the Testaments
is dualistic only in the sense that a person is capable of virtue or vice,
depending on one s disposition. The subject has only a single διαβούλιον
whose choice may actualize either virtue or vice. 15
James 1:2-5 presupposes a very similar psychology. James contrasts the
deity's singleness of disposition with the disputer s doubleness (δίψυχος) 16
and instability (ακατάστατος). If a dualism exists, it is a dualism of wis­
doms available to the self, but which manifest themselves in vastly differ­
ing behaviours.
This is not the wisdom that descends from above, but (it is) earth-bound (επίγειος),
psychic (ψυχική), demonic (δαιμονιώδης). For where there is jealousy and ambition
there is instability (εκεί ακαταστασία) and every kind of mean deed. But the wis­
dom from above is, in the first place, pure, then peaceable, gentle, easily persuaded,
filled with mercy and good fruits, not divided (αδιάκριτος), without hypocrisy. For
the fruit of justice is sown in peace by those who make peace." (Jas 3:15-18)
Like the Testaments^ James depicts two sources of influence upon the
human psyche, variously called the spirit of truth and the spirit of decep­
tion, God and Beliar, or the wisdom from above and earth-bound wis­
dom. Neither assumes that the self is corrupted by an intractably evil
part—either a ΡΊΠ IT or a cosmologica! principle such as the Pauline
σαρξ 1 7 —though both take for granted that God supplies the means by
which subjects can choose the good and reject vice.
For James the obstacles to virtuous behaviour and to receiving divine
benefits are the enticements of pleasure and desire. James makes this clear
in his second paraphrase of Q 11:9 in 4:3, where Q s statement is reversed
and that reversal then explained: αιτείτε και ου λαμβάνετε, διότι κακώς
αίτεΐσθε, ϊνα εν ταΐς ήδοναις υμών δαπανήσητε, "you ask and do not
receive, because you ask badly in order to spend on your pleasures" (4:3).
Strife, discontent and the "pleasures (ήδοναί) which are at war in your
members" (4:1) break the simple link between asking and receiving
announced in Jas 1:5.
The Testaments likewise target ήδοναί and έπιθυμίαι as obstacles to
piety: pleasure and confusion are linked in Τ Dan 5.2 and contrasted
with having the "peace of God"; Joseph is commended for not admitting
επιθυμία into his disposition (T Rub. 4.9); the Testament ofAsher (3.2)
declares that "the double-faced do not serve God but their own έπιθυμίαι";
and T. Jos. 7.8 asserts that to submit to desire is to become its slave so that
even should one hear something good, it is mistaken for evil.
Philo is even clearer on the threat of pleasure and desire to the mind.
Using language remarkably similar to that of Jas 1:14, he states of plea­
sure:
For there is nothing which, lured by pleasure (προς ηδονής δελεασθέν), is not
dragged (ειλκυσται) and caught by her thickly-twisted nets, from which escape is
very difficult. But the paths of φρονήσις και σωφροσύνη and the other virtues, if not
untrodden, are in any event not well worn. For few are those who have trodden
them, who have genuinely devoted themselves to philosophy and have only an asso­
ciation with the good, paying no regard to everything else whatever. (Agr. 103-5)
and again:
For if the soul is driven by desire (προς επιθυμίας έλαύνεται) or enticed by pleasure
(ύφ' ηδονής δελεάζεται) or diverted from its course by fear or shrunken by grief or
helpless in the grip of anger, it makes itself a slave, and indeed one who has many
owners. But if it vanquishes ignorance by φρόνησις, incontinence by σωφροσύνη,
cowardice by courage, and greed by righteousness, it gains not only freedom from
slavery but the gift of ruling as well. (Prob. 159)
The contours of the philosophical pedigree of James and the Testaments
are indistinct, because neither explicitly engages the basic questions posed
by Greek thinkers on origin, nature, and control of the passions. It is
not clear, for example, whether either James or the Testaments presuppose
Philo's Platonizing anthropology, which understood επιθυμία to be the
irrational third division of the soul, along with the higher divisions of
το θυμικόν and το λογικόν. 18 Nor is it obvious that either James or the
Testaments treats the passions, as Philo did, as "irrational and unnatural
movements of the soul." 19 The Testaments and James, much more than
Philo, have mythologized their psychologies by their references to Beliar
and the Devil. T. Ash. 3.2 warns against being double-faced and recom­
mends "destroying the Devil with good works" (άναιροΰντες τον διάβολον
έν ταις άγαθαίς υμών πράξεσιν), while James counsels submission to God
so that the Devil might flee (4:7). Like Philo, however, the Testaments and
James conceive the soul as faced with a choice between the pursuit of
desire or the pursuit of virtue, with the choice of virtue enabled by God
and informed by the Law. 20
Since neither James nor the Testaments engages in a theoretical reflec­
tion on the passions, it is unclear whether they would side with the Stoic
view that the passions are to be extirpated or the Peripatetic view that
they are only to be moderated. 21 What is clear is that for James false beliefs
about God and the false pursuit of desire are sources of instability, which
in turn undermines the efficacy of God's benefactions.
This notion that passions are a disease for which the remedy is cogni­
tive is old, articulated as early as Democritus (V BCE):
For while the physician s art, according to Democritus, heals the diseases of the body,
wisdom frees the soul from passions (σοφίη δε ψυχήν παθών αφαιρείται). (Dem­
ocritus, Diels-Kranz, frag. 3 1 = Clement, Paed. 1.6)
Later discussions in Plato and Aristotle maintained the view that true
knowledge overcomes the passions, although there were substantially
varying accounts of how the appetitive and rational parts or powers of the
soul interacted. 22 The passions were commonly regarded as the cause of
the disturbances in the soul and as inimical to the goal of tranquillity and
singleness of mind. 2 3 Thus, both the Testaments' 'disturbance' (ταραχή) of
the soul and James's ακαταστασία reflect this view of the self disturbed by
the passions.
The notion of having two minds or two souls as a metaphor to account
for epistemological or moral conflict in the self is also old, attested in
Theognis (VI BCE), 2 4 Parmenides (V BCE), 2 5 Xenophon (V/IV BCE) 2 6 and
Plato. 27 Platos argument in Respublica 439E-441A advanced a proof
that the soul could not be unitary but must be tripartite, including το
λογιστικόν, το έπιθυμητικόν and το θυμοειδές. Hence, when the soul was
troubled, it was by the conflict between its rational, appetitive and spir­
ited parts. Philo, who adopted this tripartite division, was nevertheless,
strongly inclined to embrace the Stoic ideal of απάθεια, 2 8 which necessar­
ily entailed the elimination of the appetitive and spirited powers, leaving
only the rational, something that Platos psychology did not envisage. 29
Famously, Stoics rejected the notion of a soul divided into rational and
irrational parts, and affirmed instead a psychological holism: the soul is
acted upon by "appearances" (φαντασίαι), to which the ήγεμονικόν or
governing faculty gives its assent. In the moral realm, the sage infallibly
assents to a φαντασία whose propositional content is an objectively true
principle. Most persons, however, are faced with ambiguous appearances
and mistaken beliefs and hence, in assenting to these impressions, act
wrongly. 30 Mental instability itself is not a matter of two (or three)
opposed components of the soul at war with each other; it arises instead
from false beliefs which, when given assent by the mind, leads to instabil­
ity. Diogenes Laertius describes the Stoic position this way: "from false­
hoods there arises corruption in the mind; this is the source of passions
and instability" (ακαταστασία, D.L. 7.HO). Arius Didymus, a Stoic of
the Augustan period, puts it trenchantly:
They say that every inferior person is insane, since he has ignorance of himself and of
his concerns, and this is insanity. Ignorance is the vice opposite to φρόνησις, and this
is insanity because it in its relative disposition it makes our impulses unstable
(ακατάστατους) and fluttering (πτοιώδεις). Hence they give his outline of insanity—
fluttering ignorance (αγνοιαν πτοιώδη). (Arius Didymus apud Stobaeus 2.68.18-23 =
32
SVF 3.663)
When Dio describes the mind dominated by vice, he likewise emphasizes
its instability, comparing it to the waves of the sea in terms that recall
James 1:6:
For it is only by getting rid of the vices which excite and disturb people—envy, greed,
contentiousness, each seeking to promote his own welfare at the expense of both
one's native land and the common good—that is it possible ever to breathe the breath
of harmony in full strength and vigour and to unite upon a common policy. For
those in whom these and similar vices are prevalent are necessarily in a constant state
of instability and are liable to clash for the slightest reason and to be thrown into
confusion, just as happens at sea when contrary winds prevail (καθάπερ εν θαλάττη
πνευμάτων εναντίων ισχυόντων). (Dio Chrysostom 34.19)
Instability is not a matter of two warring principles, but rather the mind
vacillating between two contrary judgments. This view is classically reported
by Plutarch:
But some [Stoics] say that passion is no different from reason, and that there is no
dissension and conflict between the two, but a turning of one and the same reason to
both directions (ενός λόγου τροπήν έπ' αμφότερα), which we do not notice owing to
the sharpness and speed of the change (όξύτητι και τάχει μεταβολής). We do not
perceive that the natural instrument of appetite and regret, or anger and fear, is the
same part of the soul, which is moved by pleasure towards wrong, and while moving
recovers itself again. For appetite and anger and fear and all such things are corrupt
opinions and judgments which do not arise about just one part of the soul but are
the whole commanding-faculty's inclinations, yieldings, assents and impulses and,
quite generally, activities which change rapidly, just like children's fights, whose fury
and intensity are volatile and transient owing to their weakness. (Plutarch, Virt. Mor.
446F-447A [= SVF 3.459]; trans.: LS 65g)
This description of acts of assent that change rapidly (συγκαταθέσεις εν
όλίγω μεταπτωταί) or what elsewhere is described as buttering' (πτοία) 33
seems to be just what James has in mind in the use of δίψυχος and
ακατάστατος. The 'disputer' or δίψυχος is unstable precisely because he
vacillates between false and true judgments. The remedy for such instabil­
ity is cognitive: on the one hand, the correct judgment that God is
good—'simply good—such that the nature of God s goodness is not only
fides quae creditur but fides qua creditur, that is, the manner that the belief
about God is also to be embraced; on the other hand, the subject must
recognize that instability or vacillation or disputing is due to έπιθυμίαι
and ήδοναί, which prevent the subject from receiving God s gifts.
In his elaboration of Q 11:9, then, James reflects some of the same
concerns as those of the Testaments and Philo in warning of the deleteri­
ous effects of επιθυμία on the psyche. This appears to be the legacy of the
philosophical psychology of Platonism and (especially) Stoicism, 34 proba-
bly mediated through the Hellenistic Judaism represented by the Testa-
merits of the Twelve Patriarchs and Philo. Insofar as the Testaments are
generally supposed to reflect the influence of Stoicism, 35 it seems a reason-
able conclusion that James may also incline to the Stoic views of the self. 36
A second example of James's transformation of a saying of Jesus which
points in the same direction is found in Jas 1:2-4, 12-15. The statement
of 1:12, μακάριος άνήρ δς υπομένει πειρασμόν, δτι δόκιμος γενόμενος
λήμψεται τον στέφανον της ζωής, όν έπηγγείλατο τοις άγαπώσιν αυτόν,
when coupled with the opening injunction, πασαν χαράν ήγήσασθε,
αδελφοί μου, όταν πειρασμοις περιπέσητε ποικίλοις, and the reprise in
5:10, υπόδειγμα λάβετε, αδελφοί, της κακοπαθείας και της μακροθυμίας
τους προφήτας, is strongly reminiscent of Q 6:22-23, the persecution
beatitude, which features the thematic word μακάριος, the injunction to
rejoice in the midst of troubles (χαίρετε καί [άγαλλιασθε]) and adduces
the example of the persecution of the prophets. 37
Several of James's transformations of this saying are noteworthy, but in
this context I would like to draw attention to James's focus on the inter­
nal state which characterizes the appropriate perspective on testing.
Whereas Q elaborates the types of persecution that might occur—re­
proach, persecution, calumny—, James reduces this part of the saying to
the strikingly alliterative phrase, πειρασμοις περιπέσητε ποικίλοις. The
reduction is noteworthy on two grounds. First, while Q clearly has in view
overt actions taken against the Jesus people by others, James's πειρασμοί
remains open to several interpretations: either overt acts of persecution,
as is the case with parallel texts in 4 Maccabees and 2 Baruch, 38 or the
more ordinary pressures of life, or even purely interior conflicts and fears,
which might also be conceived as nestings.' 39 Second, James's qualification
of πειρασμοί with ποικίλοι gestures in the direction that will emerge
more fully in 1:12-15. When used with 'temptation and 'desire', ποικίλος
recalls the description of Aphrodite, in particular in her nature as one
who beguiles and seduces. 40 Homer famously describes the varied-color
girdle worn by Aphrodite, and which Aphrodite lends to Hera, so that she
may "subdue all immortals and mortals" with love and desire (φιλότητα
και ΐμερον). Aphrodite looses
the embroidered girdle of varied colours (κεστον ιμάντα ποικίλον) wherein are fash­
ioned all manner of allurements (οί θελκτήρια πάντα); therein is love (φιλότης),
therein desire (ίμερος), therein dalliance (όαριστύς)—beguilement (πάρφασις) that
steals the wits even of the wise (77. 14.214-17).
That Aphrodites girdle was still the object of attention in the first century
is shown by Cornutus' comments on this very passage, emphasizing
Aphrodite s deceptive nature, epitomized by the changing colours of her
girdle:
Paphos is her own dwelling place, being called the 'Paphian', perhaps elliptically from
άποφάσκειν ('to beguile'), which is to deceive (άπατάν). For according to Hesiod she
has both smiles and deceptions, and according to Homer, an allure that stole the wits
of the wise. The girdle is well furnished, adorned and of varied colours (ποικίλος),
having the power to bind and gird up. {De natura deorum 45-46) 4 1
To characterize the πειρασμοί as ποικίλοι will anticipate James s later focus
on desire as the real temptation to be resisted or shunned.
As the comparison with Q 6:22-23 shows, James's interest lies not in
the particulars of πειρασμοί but in the internal processes that πειρασμοί
occasion, especially if one regards temptation not as an evil to be avoided
but as an occasion for moral progress. James, like Q, still has in view a
reward for moral achievement, but he describes this in the language of
civic or athletic honours—a wreath or crown—rather than with the agrar­
ian language of μισθός, the ordinary Greek term for Vages'. But most of
his attention is focused on the one hand on the cultivation of υπομονή
and the perfection and completeness which flow from this, and on the
other, the false belief that πειρασμοί come from God rather than from
one's own desires (έπιθυμίαι), which are in fact lures and traps that lead
to sin and thence to death.
Three philosophical claims inform James's reframing and elaboration of
Q 6:22-23.
1. Υπομονή and the Cultivation of Moral Perfection
The first claim that James makes is that πειρασμοί should not be regarded
as evils but as occasions for joy since they lead to moral progress and,
indeed, perfection. A similar claim is made by 1 Pet 1:6-7, using wording
that is strikingly similar to James:
In this you shall rejoice (άγαλλιάσθε), if now for a little time (ολίγον άρτι) it is
necessary that you suffer in variegated trials (εν ποικίλοις πειρασμοις), so that the
approval of your faith (το δοκίμιον υμών της πίστεως)—more precious than gold
which, though perishable, is tested through fire—might be found to be commend­
able and reputable and honorable at the άποκαλύψις of Jesus Christ.
As 1 Peter s ολίγον άρτι makes clear, the author has adopted the apocalyp­
tic trope of a time of tribulation that will come to an end with the apoka-
lypsis Iesou Christou. Hence, we should understand πειρασμοί in 1 Peter as
sufferings imposed on the faithful by others and not as daily testings, still
42
less an internal struggle with oneself. James, by contrast, focuses not on
external pressures and their cessation but on the interior processes which
adversity occasions, and on the causal chain that leads to right actions or
sinful ones.
Commentators routinely note the similarities between the chain con­
structions (climax, sorites, gradationes) in Jas 1:2-4, 1 Pet 1:6-7 and
Rom 5:3-5. Each uses the figure of a climax to connect the experiencing
of πειρασμοί or θλίψεις with the development of endurance (υπομονή:
James; Romans), approval, and a final state, variously described as being
'perfect' (James), having hope (Romans), or being praiseworthy (1 Peter). 43
Although there is a common pattern, the distinctives of James are not to
be missed. Whereas 1 Peter and Romans promote the mystical notion
of participation in the sufferings of Christ (Rom 6:1-11; 1 Pet 4:13), and
while both have a pronounced eschatological orientation, there is no
christological orientation to the trials in James and the eschatological
aspect is muted. 4 4 For James the focus is on the virtue which endurance
produces.
It is of course a common motif in wisdom literature that the pious are
tested through adversity. 45 The logic of adversity, however, is variously
elaborated. In some texts, adversity is likened to parental discipline and
hence, conceived as part of an ordinary process of growth.
Jdt 8:25-27: Let us give thanks (εύχαριστήσωμεν) to the Lord our God who is
putting us to the test (πειράζει) as he did our ancestors. Remember what he did
with Abraham and how he tested Isaac, and what happened to Jacob in Syrian Meso­
potamia ... for he has not tried us with fire as he did them, to search their hearts, nor
has he taken vengeance on us; but the Lord scourges those who are close to him in
order to admonish them.
In other instances, the focus is on Gods reward of those who endure
suffering:
2Apoc. Bar. 52:5-7: Rejoice in the suffering you now endure: why concern yourselves
about the downfall of your enemies? Make yourself ready for what is reserved for
you, and prepare yourself for the reward laid up for you.
4 Maccabees elaborates the logic of adversity with detailed attention to
what it produces in the subject: the subduing of the passions:
What person who lives as a philosopher by the whole rule of philosophy and having
trusted in God and who knows that it is blessed to endure any suffering (πάντα
πόνον ύπομένειν) for the sake of virtue, would not be able to control the passions
through piety (περικρατήσειεν των παθών δια την θεοσέβειαν)? For only the wise
and the brave person is master of his passions (μόνος γαρ ό σοφός και ανδρείος έστιν
των παθών κύριος). (4 Mace 7:21-22)
4 Maccabees neither uses the metaphor of parental discipline to account
for adversity nor does it suggest that God is the ultimate source of such
testing. On the contrary, it is not God but an evil tyrant that is the agent
of adversity, and suffering becomes the occasion for Eleazar and his sons
to exhibit the control of their passions—both pain and pleasure—through
reason (4 Mace 6:31-35). They best their torturers through superior rea­
son, here understood as reason founded upon the Torah. 46 There is indeed
a prize, but it is a prize intrinsically related to endurance itself:
For we, though our suffering and endurance (της κακοπαθείας και υπομονής), shall
obtain the prizes of virtue and we shall be with God, on whose account we also suffer
(δι' ov και πάσχομεν). (4 Mace 9:8)
DeSilva points out that the author "shares with both Roman and Helle­
nistic Jewish authors the conviction that the removal of death's sting is a
prerequisite to absolute commitment to virtue," 47 citing Seneca:
The man who, relying on reason, marches through mortal vicissitudes with the spirit
of a god, has no vulnerable spot where he can receive an injury—do you think I
mean only from man? No, not even fortune, who, whenever she has encountered
virtue, has always left the field outmatched. If that supreme event beyond which
outraged laws and the most cruel masters have nothing with which to threaten us,
and in which fortune uses up all her power, is met with a calm and unruffled mind,
and if we understand that death is not an evil and therefore not an injury either
(scimus mortem malum non esse, ob hoc ne tniuriam quidem), we shall much more eas­
ily bear all other things (multo facthus aha tolerabimus)—losses and pains, disgrace,
48
changes of abode, bereavements and separations [De constantia 8 3)
As in De constantia, so also in 4 Maccabees, reason is what allows the sage
to dominate the passions and to exhibit self-control in the midst of suf­
fering. For Seneca the cognitive component of endurance is the recogni­
tion that death and suffering are αδιάφορα; for 4 Maccabees reason
founded on the recognition of the divine origin and sanction of the Torah
allows the rational person to master the passions and to shun suffering
and death. 49 Accordingly, Eleazar repels the persecutor s attack on his loy­
alty to the Law by means of reason, controlling his passions and acting in
accordance with the Law. 50
The argument in Jas 1:2-4 takes us beyond the apocalyptic trope of the
eschatological necessity of suffering and even beyond 4 Maccabees' model
of a passive endurance that is able through reason to resist and dominate
the passions. 51 James 1:2-4 indeed elevates passive endurance but argues
that it is not merely an expression of self-control informed by reason, but
that it is ûso productive of virtue or, as he calls it, perfection and wholeness.
The notion that endurance is productive of virtue appears in a seminal
form in the Testament of Joseph, where the πειρασμοί in question are
sexual:
In ten testings (πειρασμοις) he showed that I was approved (δόκιμον), and in all of
these I was patient; for patience is a great medicine (δτι μέγα φάρμακόν έστιν ή
52
μακροθυμία) and endurance (υπομονή) produces many good things. {T. Jos. 2.7)
It is in Seneca, however, that the strongest connection between enduring
hardship and the production of virtue is articulated. Disaster, he asserts, is
virtue's opportunity {DeProvidentia 4.6: calamitas virtutis occasio est.). The
sage should rejoice in hardship (4.4). It is the enduring of hardship that
shows forth the virtuous man as virtuous. Moreover, the enduring of
adversity gradually makes one the equal oí fortuna. Adducing the example
of the severe treatment of Spartan children, Seneca argues:
Why, then, is it strange if God tries noble spirits with severity. If we are lashed and
torn by fortune, let us bear it; it is not cruelty but a struggle, and the more often we
engage in it the stronger we shall be (<quo> saepius adierimus, fortiores erimus). The
staunchest member of the body is the one that is kept in constant use We should
offer ourselves to Fortune in order that, struggling with her, we may be hardened by
her {ut contra tllam ab ipsa duremur) Gradually she will make us a match for her
(paulatim nos sibi pares faciei) {De Providentia 4 12)
James likewise treats adversity (πειρασμοί) as the occasion for moral prog­
ress. Later in the letter he invokes the example of Job (5:11), renowned
for his υπομονή, as an example of response to affliction (κακοπαθεία).
Here, James draws on post-biblical developments in the Job tradition and
indeed on a more general philosophical tendency to value endurance as a
positive and independent virtue. In the LXX of Job, the ύπομεν- root only
means 'wait', 'abide', or 'hope'. In the Testament of Job·, however, υπομονή
has come to refer, as it does in 4 Maccabees, to the enduring of suffering
and even degradation.
The association of virtue with endurance is not, of course, exclusively
Stoic. Endurance or perseverance, originally a military virtue, 53 was in
later philosophical discourse demilitarized and connected both with moral
struggle and with knowledge of what is good. 54 It is the mark of virtue to
endure misfortune with patience. 55 Nevertheless for Aristotle endurance
as a virtue was inferior to self-restraint, the latter being active and requir­
ing mastery, while the former required only passive resistance. 56
The connection between endurance and knowledge nevertheless remained
strong. According to Aristotle υπομονή is always subservient to φρονησις
and is evaluated in light of its relationship to knowledge of what is good:
"The courageous man then is he that endures (υπομένων) or fears the
right things and for the right purpose (α δει και ου ένεκα) and in the
right manner and at the right time (ως δει καί δτε), and who shows confi­
57
dence in a similar way" {Eth. Nie. 3.7.5 1115b). This connection is pre­
served by Chrysippus, who emphasized the cognitive component in
endurance, as "the knowledge of what is bearable and not bearable
(έπιστήμην έμμενετέων και ουκ έμμενετέων)." 58 In the first century, Muso-
nius Rufus treated endurance under suffering no longer as a secondary
and subservient virtue, but as essential element in the training for both
body and soul.
Now there are two kinds of training (άσκησις), one which is appropriate for the soul
alone, and the other that is common to both soul and body. We use the training
common to both when we discipline ourselves to cold, heat, thirst, hunger, meager
rations, hard beds, avoidance of pleasures, and endurance under suffering. For by
these things and others like them the body is strengthened and becomes capable of
enduring hardship, sturdy and ready for any task; the soul too is strengthened, since it
is trained through endurance under hardship for courage, and for self-control by abstinence
from pleasures (γυμναζομένη δια μεν της υπομονής των επίπονων προς άνδρείαν,
δια δε της αποχής των ηδέων προς σωφροσύνην). (Musonius Rufus, Diss. 6) 5 9
James's emphasis on the cognitive component of endurance (v. 3: γινώσκοντες
οτι) is thus in accord with philosophical discourse since Aristotle, and his
privileging of endurance as a central virtue is consistent with the empha­
sis upon endurance in later Hellenistic moral philosophy, not merely as
the passive and weaker counterpart to courage or self-control, but as a vir­
tue which actively trains the soul in virtue. The elevation of υπομονή is
especially prominent in Philo, 60 who is in fact responsible for twenty-six
of the forty-five occurrences of υπομονή in philosophical literature prior
to the second century CE. For Philo endurance is the "mightiest of the vir­
tues" {Cher. 78-79).
James claims in 1:4 that the approval of one s faith produces υπομονή
which, when allowed to have its effect, makes one τέλειος και ολόκληρος
(1:4). This is a dramatic claim indeed, especially in light of the final
phrase έν μηδενί λειπόμενοι. Since the next sentence conceives of what is
lacking as wisdom, 1:4 suggests that the cultivation of endurance, if left
to have its full effect, should result in the perfection of wisdom. 61 This
claim is not in conflict with the later statement in 1:12 that those who
endure will receive the crown of life, a statement which is the counterpart
to Q's οτι ό μισθός υμών πολύς εν τω ούρανφ. 4 Mace 4:11-17 also repre­
sents Eleazar, who had already achieved mastery over his passions, being
awarded το νικος αφθαρσία εν ζωη πολυχρονίω at his death. 62
That James can represent the exercise of endurance as the route to per­
fection makes perhaps the best sense on the theory that the virtues are
indivisible, such that to have one is to have all. The converse of this the­
ory is expressed in the Testament ofAsher 2.2-8 where the author imagines
a person who steals and swears falsely, but pities the poor. His conclusion
is unequivocal: όλον δε πονηρόν έστι (2.5). This is both because of the
unity of the virtues and vices and because human intentionality is indivis­
ible. James himself takes the same view in 2:10: to break one command­
ment is to break all. The logic appears to be based on the well-known Stoic
maxim, qui unum autem habet vitium y omnia habet (Seneca, Ben. 5.15) 63
and on their argument that the virtues are indivisible. 64
Finally, James's development of Q 6:22-23 in 1:12-15 first restates the
conclusion that endurance is rewarded and then moves to an argument e
contrario. James argues two propositions: first, that God is not the author
of temptation; on the contrary, temptations arise from desire; and second,
that just as the enduring of testing leads through approval to perfection
and the 'crown of life', giving way to επιθυμία inevitably gives birth to sin
and death.
The claim that God is not the author of temptation is striking, since it
so obviously conflicts with a string of assertions in Judaean literature to
the opposite effect. Although James cites Job as an example of endurance
under suffering, he dramatically parts company with the Job tradition,
which attributes the ultimate agency in evil to God. 6 5 As Dibelius
observed, later wisdom literature sometimes took issue with the attribu­
tion to temptation to God, probably under the influence of Hellenistic
philosophy. Sirach advises: "Do not say that I have left the right way
because of God; for what he hates he will not do. Do not say that he
caused me to go astray; for he has no need of a sinful man" (Sir 15:11-
12). 66 The strongest statements, however, are found in such authors as
Philo, who in Fug. 79 argues, εν ήμίν γαρ αύτοίς, ως εφην, οι των κακών
είσι θησαυροί, παρά θεω δε οί μόνων αγαθών, "the treasuries of evils, as
I have said, are in ourselves; with God there are good things only." 67
The pedigree of this argument should probably be traced to Plato, who
argued against the proposition that god had agency in evil (Resp. 33 5 D,
379C-380C; Tim. 29E-30A). 68 Later Stoic discussion began from this
Socratic premise and then argued that suffering, poverty, illness and even
death were not evils at all, but αδιάφορα, indifférents. The essence of vir-
tue was to pursue only the proper ends—prudence, moderation, courage,
and justice. Illness, poverty, and death are only regarded as evils by those
who misperceive their opposites as proper ends and then, quite naturally,
fall prey to them in the ordinary course of events. 69 Thus, Seneca rejects
the idea that god is the cause of evil: "nature never permits good to be
injured by good; between good men and gods there exists a friendship
brought about by virtue" (DeProvidentia 1.5). 70 What appear to be evils
are αδιάφορα and therefore not evils at all to the sage. What counts is not
that one suffers, but how one suffers: non quid sed quaemadmodum feras
interest (De Providentia 2.4). 71
When one considers the argument advanced in James 1:2-4 it is impor­
tant to note that like the Stoic argument, James asserts that πειρασμοί
should not be regarded as evils but as the occasions for moral progress.
They are not to be avoided but rather embraced. Whether this is specifi­
cally or distinctively Stoic, it is at least compatible with Stoic ethical teaching.
I have already indicated the strong convergence between James and
Philo on blaming έπιθυμίαι for the corruption of the soul. 72 Philo's expo­
sition of the Decalogue s ουκ επιθυμήσεις in De specialibus legibus identi­
fies επιθυμία as the chief culprit in the battle for the soul:
Every passion is blameworthy, since every inordinate and 'excessive impulse'
(πλεονάζουσα ορμή) and 'irrational and unnatural movements of the soul' (της
ψυχής ή άλογος και παρά φύσιν κίνησις) is under accusation. For each of these is
nothing other than the completion of a long-standing passion. So if a man does not
set limits to his impulses and bridle them like horses which defy the reins (μηδέ
χαλινον ώσπερ τοις άφηνιασταΐς ϊπποις έντίθησι), he has a passion that is difficult
to cure, and because of that defiance, he will be carried off and forget like a driver
borne by his team into ravines or impassible abysses from which it is hardly possible
to escape. But none of the passions is so troublesome as desire for the things he lacks
(επιθυμία των απόντων), things that seem good, though in truth they are not. Desire
breeds (έντίκτουσα) fierce and endless yearnings; for it tortures and drives the soul as
far as possible into the distance; while what he pursues flees insolently, it has its face
to him, not its back. For when it perceives desire eagerly racing after it, it stands still
for a while in order to lure it (υπέρ του δελεάσαι) and to offer the hope of capturing
it, but then it takes off, mocking and railing as the distance increases. Desire, outdis­
tanced and losing ground, is in distress and inflicts on the wretched soul the punish­
ment of Tantalus. The story has it that when he would get him something to drink
could not because the water slipped away. And when he wished to pluck fruit, it all
73
vanished, since the productivity of the trees became barren. {Spec. 4.79-81)
Philo s definition of passion as ή άλογος και παρά φύσιν ψυχής κίνησις, ή
ορμή πλεονάζουσα is Stoic, 74 though his image of taming an unruly horse
is an obvious allusion to the Phaedrus (253D-254E). 75
As Walter Wilson has argued, the argument in Jas 1:12-15 "highlights
how the human choice, made one way or the other, sets in motion a chain
of events that determines one s final destiny.... The decision that con­
fronts the human self in its experience of evil, then, is presented as a deci­
sion between endurance and desire." 76 Wilson is keen to distinguish
James s anthropology from that of Philo, for whom the soul is divided
into the rational and irrational parts. 77 James's rational ethic may in fact
come much closer to Stoic psychology, according to which the self is not
directly subject to irrational passions; instead, "reason intervenes as the
craftsman of impulse" (τεχνίτης γαρ ούτος [λόγος] έπιγίνεται της ορμής;
Diogenes Laertius 7.86). 78 James's declaration that the one who wavers is
unstable 'in all his ways' reflects the conviction of Stoic ethics, that the
virtues are indivisible and intent the same end. 79 Consequently for James,
indecision in one moral realm constitutes the entire person as 'unstable'
and, correspondingly, violation of one prescription of the Torah consti­
tutes a violation of all.
I want to make clear that I am not arguing that the letter of James knew
Plato, Zeno, Arius Didymus or Seneca, or that he knows 4 Maccabees or
Philo. I would not exclude these possibilities entirely, and indeed as con­
servative an exegete as J.B. Mayor, after citing a substantial number of
Stoic parallels to James, allowed that James may have had Stoic sources
such as Posidonius. 80 The key point of this essay is that in paraphrasing,
parsing, and re-presenting sayings of Jesus, the author of the letter reveals
an array of interests in psychagogy and the care of the soul which we
know also to have characterized various strains of Hellenistic philosophy
of the early Roman period. This had a demonstrable effect on such works
of Hellenistic Judaism as 4 Maccabees, the Testaments of the Twelve Patri-
arch, and Philo, and, as I have urged, James. In inflecting the Jesus tradi­
tion, the author of James displays a remarkable interest, not in such
concrete ends as subsistence, debt relief, and the rewards for withstanding
persecution, but rather in the psychic processes that occur between stimu­
lus and decision and in the role that proper cognition plays in construct­
ing the subject as τέλειος.
This array of interests in psychagogy permits us to suggest a social loca­
tion of James within those circles of educated or semi-educated Judaeans,
probably urban, who understood the Torah to be consistent with the best
of Greek philosophy, and indeed urged that the ideals of popularized
Platonism and Stoicism could best be met by adhering to the Torah, con­
ceived as the "law of perfect freedom" and the "implanted logos" 81