The discussion of the early Christian prepositional formulae υπέρ υμών or
ημών has an impressive Scandinavian tradition. One of the most influen­
tial publications to the topic is surely Harald Riesenfelds article on υπέρ
in Kittel's theological dictionary. In a note Riesenfeld stressed the impor­
tance of distinguishing between those cases where υπέρ stands with a per­
sonal object and those cases where it is followed by τών αμαρτιών. 1 In his
interpretation of the ύπέρ-phrases though, Riesenfeld did not distinguish
between the verbs governing the prepositions. The verbs άποθνήσκειν or
(παρα)διδόναι were all to refer to an action of atonement (Sühne), as long
as they were followed by the preposition υπέρ or in some cases by δια
and the accusative. Interpreting the ύπέρ-formulae in this way, Riesenfeld
followed Joachim Jeremías, who in his article on παις θεοΰ in Kittels dic­
tionary, advocated the view that the ύπέρ-formulae are all said to be
understood against the backdrop of the tradition of the Suffering Servant
of Isaiah 53, which is said to express the notion of an atoning sacrifice
2
which takes away the consequences of sin.
Although Riesenfeld was aware of the important differences between
the MT and LXX texts of Isaiah 53 and that the παραδιδόναι-terminology
in Isaiah 53:6 and 12 does not occur in the Hebrew, he meant to over­
come this problem by claiming that the LXX followed a text tradition
closer to that of the Isaiah-Targum. Keeping the date of Targum Pseudo-
Jonathan in mind, which is an 8th century document, it is much more
3
likely that the LXX-translation influenced the Targum. It is also not pos­
sible to detach the prepositional phrase from the ruling verbs. Rather it is
the ruling verb which signifies the broader frame which forms the back­
drop of the prepositional phrase.
The phrase "dying for someone" has been scrutinized by scholars of the
New Testament. It can be claimed that since the groundbreaking research
of Klaus Wengst, Sam Williams and Martin Hengel and more recently
Henk Versnel, it has been illustrated that the early Christian notion
"dying for someone" has its roots in Greek tradition. 4 The notion of dying
for someone else to avert evil from him/her ranges back to the tragedies of
Euripides. This notion kept its influence until Roman times, as Henk
Versnel illustrated. 5 In a new landmark investigation of the motif, Christina
Eschner came up with additional evidence that Euripedian heroines
like Alcestis and Macaria served as role models for women in Pauls
times, expressing the highest level of dedication towards their spouses. 6
It was known that the motif found its way into Plato, Stoicism and 2 and
7
4 Maccabees, into sepulchral inscriptions and decorations. Eschner showed
us that the motif became popular not only through tragedy itself, but
it also resounded in popular philosophy, in wall paintings in villas and
in common proverbial speech in the Greek and Latin traditions during
8
the early Roman Empire. One can readily say that it became part of
9
common culture.
Paul and the early Christian tradition surely draw on this tradition
when they formulate the saving effect of the death of the Messiah in the
phrase, "Christ died for us/for our sins." To a certain extent, this tradition
10
can explain the dying formulae, but what is the underlying conception
behind the traditional phrase that Jesus the Lord "was delivered because
of our transgressions" (δς παρεδόθη δια τα παραπτώματα ημών—Rom
4:25a) or that God delivered his own Son "for us all" (υπέρ ημών πάντων
παρέδωκεν αυτόν—Rom 8:32). Are not these utterances to be understood
against the backdrop of Isaiah 53:6, 12 as Riesenfeld claimed, thereby fol­
lowing Joachim Jeremías? Rom 4:25a seems to be the strongest case. Here
the verb παρεδόθη is in the passive and rules the preposition διά, as is the
case in the LXX Isaiah 53:12. And if Isaiah 53:12 forms the backdrop for
Rom 4:25 this might as well be the case in Rom 8:32. n
Not every one however, agreed with the above mentioned position of
Riesenfeld. One of his brightest students, Nils Dahl, who earned his doc­
toral honours in Oslo, came up with a fresh solution. Rather than the
idea of cultic atonement, he suggested that the tradition of the binding of
Isaac Çaqedah) forms the backdrop of the ύπέρ-formulae. Especially the
terminology of Rom 8:32a is said to allude to Gen 22:16-17: "The exe-
getical pattern can hardly have been other than one of correspondence: as
Abraham did not spare his son, so God did not spare his own Son." But
how is this correspondence to be understood? Drawing on later explana­
13
tions by Irenaeus, Dahl interpreted Rom 8:32 in the following way:
"... the allusion to Genesis 22 in Romans 8:32a is best explained on the
assumption that it is derived from an exposition in which the atonement
was understood as an 'adequate reward' for the Akedah. Obviously, the
adequacy should not be understood in terms of quantitative equivalency
but as an exact correspondence of quality. In fact, this is how the rule
'measure for measure' was applied both in Judaism and in early Christian­
ity. Some early Jewish adherent of the crucified Messiah may have taken
Genesis 22 to imply that God, who judges those who judge and shows
mercy upon those who act with mercy, rewarded Abrahams sacrifice by
14
offering up his own Son." Even though Dahls tour de force to read all
Pauline ύπέρ-formulae, including Gal 3:13-14, against the backdrop of
the 'aqedah could not convince the scholarly community, 15 his observa­
tion that Romans 8:30-35 forms a clear inclusion with Rom 5:1, 6-11
was followed by many interpreters of Romans. 16
Another Norwegian scholar, Peder Borgen, rightly took another line on
the interpretation of Gal 3:13. He enhanced the interpretation of this
passage in the light of Deut 21:22-23: "When someone is convicted of a
crime punishable by death and is executed, and you hang him on a
tree..." Since in this passage of the Law it is unclear whether the person
hung from a tree, had been killed beforehand or was killed by the hang­
ing itself, Borgen turned to the Temple Scroll from Qumran (HQTemp
64:6-12). From the scroll it is clear that the hanging caused the death. But
does it refer to death by crucifixion? Borgen was able to clarify this point
by referring to Philos exposition of Deut 21:22-23 in book
three of the Special Laws: "Philo adds support to the understanding
that crucifixion is meant. In Spec. 3.151-52 he defines the hanging in
Deut 21:22-23 as to fix on a pole, impale (άνασκολοπίζω). When Philo
uses this verb in Somn. 2.213 he explicitly says that the fixing is done by
nailing (προσηλόω). Philo made this remark whilst discussing the impli­
17
cation of the commandment "Tliou shalt not murder!" The following
section in his exposition of Deuteronomy is of particular interest for the
question of the backdrop of the ύπέρ-formulae in early Christian tradition.
In the section immediately following upon the exposition of Deut 22:21-24,
Philo discusses Deut 24:16: "Parents shall not be put to death for their
children, nor shall children be put to death for their parents; only for
their own crimes may persons be put to death." In his comment, Philo
opposes the noble intentions of kinsmen. Compassion should not over­
come reason. To deliver the guilty from punishment and to think that it
is right that you should be punished in their place is wrong. 18 According
to Jewish law, Philo says, " . . . fathers should not die for their sons, nor
sons for their parents (πατέρας υπέρ υιών μη άποθνήσκειν μηδ' υιούς υπέρ
γονέων)." 19 Philo then continues to explain the need of the stipulation in
Deut 24:16 he is commenting on. It becomes obvious that he uses the
'dying for someone' and 'giving one s life up for someone' as alternative
ways of referring to the same action. In Spec. 3.154 he says that those
influenced by family affection, in their excessive and overwhelming devo­
tion will often be glad to die (προαποθνησκειν), giving themselves (αυτούς
έπιδιδόντες) as blameless persons (οι άνυπαίτιοι) for those who are guilty
20
(υπέρ των ενόχων).
Philo is of course not alone in using the terminology άποθνήσκειν υπέρ
τίνος and (έπι)διδόναι υπέρ τίνος as stylistic alternatives referring to the
death on behalf of other persons. Paul did and so did others! Almost a
century after them, Aelius Aristides still applies the "dying for" and "being
given for"-terminology as stylistic variants. "It is said that Erechtheus in
the war against Eumolpus, because of the god's oracle gave his daughter
on behalf of the polis (την θυγατέρα υπέρ της πόλεως έπιδοΰναι). In the
war against the Dorians and the Peloponnesians Codrus died voluntarily
on behalf of his land" (εθελοντής υπέρ της χώρας άποθανειν). 21 The so
called "dying-for"- and "deliverance for"- "formulae" thus both draw by
implication on the same Greek tradition, as Eschner has illustrated with
reference to the abovementioned and numerous other contemporary texts. 22
Now that the common Greek background of the (παρα)διδόναι υπέρ
τίνος- and the άποθνησκειν υπέρ τινος-phrases has been confirmed, 23 the
relationship between LXX Isaiah 53:6 and 12 and the "pre"-Pauline tradi­
tion in Rom 4:25 should be revisited. As has been noted, the Greek trans­
lation of the LXX does use the passive form of the verb παραδιδόναι to
express that the servant was delivered to suffer and to be martyred. This
is said in the context where it is stated that he carries the transgressions
of many. 24
Rom 4:25a is commonly regarded to be a traditional parallelism and
the use of the verb (παρα)διδόναι is taken as an allusion to LXX Isaiah
53:12. 25 When comparing Rom 4:25 to LXX Isaiah 53:12 it should how­
ever be kept in mind that the Greek text of Isaiah 53 is formulated in
such a way that it deviates considerably from the Hebrew original.
The use of the Greek verb παραδιδόναι to translate Jtt£) is introduced in
Isaiah 47:3. 2 6 In Isaiah 53:12d, "because he has 'poured out' (ΓΓΙ^Π hiphil
of my) 27 his life to death," is translated by "his psyche was 'delivered unto'
(παρεδόθη) death." In verse 12g the last phrase "and he 'will intercede'
(JP1£Ç hiphil oí yjt£)) 28 for rebels" is rendered by "and because of their sins
'he was handed over' (δια τας αμαρτίας αυτών παρεδόθη)." The servant is
counted amongst the lawless and handed over δια τας αμαρτίας αυτών.
The function of the δια in the Greek translation in verse 12g can be
inferred from the preceding context. The phrase in verse 6c, και κύριος
παρέδωκεν αυτόν ταις άμαρτίαις ημών, needs special attention. Following
the use of the verb, 29 the dative expresses the hostile force unto which the
Lord delivers the servant. The role of the sins has to be interpreted in the
light of the διά-phrases in preceding verses so that it ought to be trans­
lated: "But he was wounded on account of our sins, and was bruised
because of our iniquities . . . and the Lord handed him over to our sins."
He suffered punishment for their sake. 30 The sins or the transgressions of
the "us" are the reason why the servant was delivered or handed over. This
has been called vicarious suffering. 31
But why was the hiphil of pJt£3 in verse 12g translated by παρεδόθη?
Why does the translator move from the meaning of JUÛ with *?, "interces-
sion" or "intervention on behalf of" 32 the rebels to παραδιδόναι in the
sense of "being handed over" because of their sins? It is notable that in
verse 6c a similar switch occurred. In this case the Hebrew verb yj£3 with
1 means "to let something strike someone." 33 According to the Hebrew text,
the "Lord caused the iniquity of us all to strike him." The Greek transla­
tor rendered the hiphil of J7Jt£D with παρέδωκεν, turning the servant into
the direct object of the Lord s action: "The Lord 'delivered' him to our
sins." In Isaiah 53:6c and 12g the translator seems to reformulate the rela­
tion between the servant and the "iniquity" (53:6c) or the "rebels"
(53:12g). The reason appears to be that he takes the hiphil of JJjt£ in the
sense of "to cause someone to be struck by something" and he translates it
and m p n in verse 12d consequently by a form of παραδιδόναι. New
research has extended available lexicographic knowledge on the use of this
Greek verb considerably. It is clear that the composite verb denotes the
deliverance to a hostile force. 34
Since the research of Joseph Ziegler and Isac Seeligman on the Greek
translation of the book of Isaiah, 35 it has become abundantly clear that, to
put it in Seeligman s words, " . . . t h e translation of Isaiah is characterized
in numerous places not only by a fairly considerable independence of the
Hebrew text, but also by the fact that it evinces an equally marked influ­
ence from the surrounding cultural atmosphere, as well as expressing the
author s personal views." 36 The considerable deviation of the Greek trans­
lation from the original Hebrew text suggests that in the case of Isaiah
53:6c, 12d and 12g the translator presupposed the well known Greek
notion of someone being handed to a hostile power to be handled as
his enemy pleases. The servant is delivered unto sin (53:6c), to death
(53:12d). Clearly the notion in 53:12g that this deliverance is "because
of their sins," is rooted in the Greek text of Isaiah 53, especially verses
4-6. According to the Isaiah text, the servant is not actively dying; the
Lord delivered him (53:6c), thus the παραδιδόναι-terminology is used.
But this formulation commended itself to the translator, since the notion
that somebody is delivered unto a hostile force, is a well known notion in
Greek thought. And this deliverance is expressed by παραδιδόναι τινά
37
τινι or τινά εις τινά, in the same way in which LXX Isaiah 53:6c and
12d+g is formulated in deviation from the Hebrew. By using this verb to
render the hiphil of Jtt£) and mp, and by depicting the servant as direct
object (cf. supra) y the translator of Isaiah 53 coherently superimposes upon
the text the notion that someone (the Lord) delivered someone (the ser­
38
vant) to a hostile force. That this is because of the iniquity of others is in
accord with the Hebrew original (cf. also verses 4 and 5).
To return to the question: "It is then possible that Rom 4:25a was
influenced by the Greek translation of Isaiah 53:12g?" Then Paul will
have to imply that Christ was given up "because of our trespasses." 39 But
even this unlikely causal interpretation of Rom 4:25a should not encour-
age anybody to postulate Isaiah 53:6c, 12d+g as an alternative "more Jew­
ish" backdrop for the interpretation of the phrase that "he was delivered
40
because o f our trespasses." The LXX text of Isaiah 53:6c and 12d+g
does not provide a backdrop entirely different from the Greco-Roman
tradition for the (παρα)διδόναι δια phrase in Rom 4:25a. As was illus­
trated above by comparing the Hebrew original and the Greek transla­
tion, the use of the παραδιδόναι-terminology in the LXX translation of
Isaiah 53:6, 12 itself is the result of the influence of the Greek tradition
of delivering someone to a hostile force on the translator of the book
of Isaiah. 41 In his use of the παραδιδόναι-terminology, the translator thus
was led more by Greek idiom than by the Hebrew original. His interpre­
tano Graeca of the original surely influenced the way in which subsequent
readers understood and applied the fate of the servant. If the "pre"-
Pauline tradition behind Rom 4:25a alludes to LXX Isaiah 53:6, 12 then
it takes up the very Greek way of expressing the deliverance unto a hostile
force 42 and presupposes the use of a Greek translation and not of a
Hebrew original. In its LXX form, however, it cannot be regarded as an
independent, non-Greek Israelite or Jewish tradition. It illustrates the
influence of Hellenised Alexandrian Judaism on early Christian tradition.
If the earliest Christian interpretation of the death of Christ in terms of
the "dying for" and "deliverance" formulae was not derived from the
Hebrew text of Isaiah 53, how did it originate? This question takes us
back to the initial stages of the Christian interpretation of Christ's death.
It is, however, important to acknowledge the fact that those Jews who
interpreted the death of Jesus had to give meaning to his crucifixion by
the Romans. They had to give meaning to his execution as an upsurgent
messianic King who was suspected to be a threat to the authority of the
Empire. He was thus, as Dahl taught us, crucified as a political rebel
under the charge "King of the Jews" (Mark 15:26). 43 Early followers of
Jesus had to make sense of the crucifixion of "a said to be king." The first
interpretation was made by those followers who had a dual experience.
They knew the tradition about Jesus' last days in Jerusalem and they
believed that God resurrected him from death. The interpretation of Jesus'
death only began after Easter. Driven by the conviction that God resur­
rected him from the dead, meaning was ascribed to the crucifixion of the
"King of the Jews," reconsidering the events preceding his death. Since, as
we could see from Philo s exposition of Deut 24:16, it was not allowed in
Jewish tradition that one person dies bearing the penalty for their next of
kin. But Philo's comment on the law also illustrate that the terminology,
"dying for" and "giving one's life for" can be applied to historical persons.
A similar transfer is documented by Cassius Dio (A.D. 150-235). 44 He
refers to an incident during the year of the three emperors A.D. 68.
Addressing his army, the Roman emperor Otho, according to Dio's narra­
tion, says: "Surely it is far better and far more just that one should perish
for all than many for one (πολύ γάρ που καί κρειττον και δικαιότερόν
έστιν ενα υπέρ πάντων ή πολλούς υπέρ ενός άπολέσθαι), and that I should
refuse on account of one man alone to embroil the Roman people in civil
war and cause so great a multitude of human beings to perish." His sol­
diers are instructed to take leave. He shall free himself, "... that all men
may learn from the event that you chose for your emperor one who would
not give you up for himself, but rather himself for you (δστις ούχ ύμας
υπέρ έαυτοΰ αλλ' εαυτόν υπέρ υμών δέδωκε)." 45
This incident helps us to understand the Greek language the first
Christians utilized metaphorically to express the saving effect of the death
of Jesus. He was crucified as "King of the Jews." Taking up this messianic
notion, they formulated that "Christ died for our sins" (1 Cor 15:3) or
that the Son was delivered because of our sins (Rom 4:25). But why did
they choose such language?
The text from Dio also sheds light on the remark of the high priest in
46
John ll:49-50: "But one of them, Caiaphas, who was high priest that
year, said to them, 'You know nothing at all! You do not understand that
it is better for you to have one man die for the people (ϊνα εις άνθρωπος
άποθάνη υπέρ του λαοΰ) than to have the whole nation destroyed.'" The
Evangelist interprets (11:51-52): "He did not say this on his own, but
being high priest that year he prophesied that Jesus was about to die for
the nation, and not for the nation only, but to gather into one the dis­
persed children of God." There can be little doubt that the Gospel uses
the Greek notion of "dying for" to give meaning to the death of the
Johannine Jesus. In fact in the beginning of his narration, in 3:16, he used
the alternate terminology by formulating that God gave his own Son:
"For God so loved the world that he gave his only Son (τον υίον τον
μονογενή έδωκεν)..."
The interesting question arises whether the remark the evangelist puts
on the lips of the high priest is reminiscent of what happened during that
particular Pesach. It is conceivable that the thoroughly Hellenized priestly
families from whose ranks the high priest came were familiar with the
Greek notion of "dying for" or being "delivered unto for." A few years
ago, no one less than the great British historian Fergus Millar noted how
much historical detail is transmitted through the Johannine passion nar­
rative. 47 Should the remark of the high priest be taken as an historical
reminiscence, his remark could have given the impetus why it was formu­
lated that "Christ died for our sins" or was "delivered because of our
transgressions." The seemingly similar notion in the Greek text of Isaiah
53:6, 12 might have facilitated the use of this Greek notion in early
Christian soteriology. In its LXX-form, it cannot however be regarded as
an independent Israelite or Jewish tradition.
