According to the Gospel and the First Episde of John, 1 believers find their
spiritual origin in God. One of the ways in which this idea is worded, is by
means of the expression έκ του θεοΰ γεννασθαι, which is, as we shall see in
detail below, translated either as "to be born of God" or as "to be begotten
by God." The expression occurs, with variations, in the following passages
(I give the Greek text as printed in NA 27 , and the two possible English
translations):
A series of related expressions, that should be taken into account as well,
occurs in logia of Jesus in his dialogue with Nicodemus in John 3:3-8:
John 3:3
John 3:5
John 3:6
John 3:7
John 3:8
έάν μή τις γεννηθη άνωθεν, ού δύναται ιδείν την βασιλείαν τοΰ
θεοΰ.
5
Unless one is born/begotten from above, one cannot see the kingdom
of God.
έάν μή τις γεννηθη έξ ύδατος και πνεύματος, ού δύναται εισελθειν
εις την βασιλείαν τοΰ θεοΰ.
Unless one is born/begotten of water and Spirit, one cannot enter the
kingdom of God.
το γεγεννημένον έκ της σαρκός σαρξ έστιν, και το γεγεννημένον έκ
τοΰ πνεύματος πνεΰμά έστιν.
What is born/begotten of the flesh is flesh, and what is born/begotten
of the Spirit is spirit.
δει υμάς γεννηθηναι άνωθεν.
You must be born/begotten from above.
οΰτως έστιν πάς ό γεγεννημένος έκ τοΰ πνεύματος.
So it is with everyone born/begotten of the Spirit.
The question is which translation of γεννασθαι we should prefer in all
these instances: should we translate "to be born" or "to be begotten"? It is
evident that the expression έκ τοΰ θεοΰ γεννασθαι and the like derives
from metaphorical use of human reproduction, and within this context,
the two translations are not completely at variance or very divergent. Nev­
ertheless, there are real differences between them as regards the sexual role
(male of female) ascribed to God. The question is therefore important
enough to give it some attention.
I shall start with a look at the translation of the relevant Johannine pas­
sages in a selection of Bible translations and biblical studies, to get an idea
of the spread and the influence of the two possible translations. Next, I
shall present relevant lexical, grammatical and exegetical considerations,
and these will finally lead to a conclusion on the translation to be preferred
and some further thoughts on it.
In this section, I shall limit myself to the most important ancient versions
and a representative selection of modern translations and commentaries. I
start with the Latin translations. Old Latin and Vulgate are unanimous in
offering in the instances in John 1:13 and 1 John the translation ex (or de)
Deo (eo, ipso) nasci, "to be born of God," and the verb nasci (or renasci)
is used as well in John 3:3-8. There are two exceptions. In 1 John 5:1b,
textual type Τ of the Old Latin has genitus est ex eo, "was begotten by him,"
probably because of the preceding reference to τον γεννήσαντα ("the one
who begat"), translated here as genitorem. In 1 John 5:18b, Old Latin and
Vulgate have generatio (or nativitas) Dei, "birth of God," for the Greek ό
γεννηθείς έκ τοΰ θεοΰ. This corresponds to the lectio facilior ή γέννησις
θεοΰ found in some Greek minuscules.
Concerning the Syriac translations, I mention that in John 1:13 Cure-
tonian Syriac and Peshitta use the verb yld etpeal, and that the same verb
is used in John 3:3-8 in Curetonian and Sinaitic Syriac and Peshitta, in
either etpeal or passive participle peal. These two forms of the verb are used
as well in the Peshitta in the 1 John passages, with the exception of 2:29,
where we find the simple wording mnh 'twhy, "is of him." The two main
Coptic translations are also consistent: the Sahidic has in all passages under
discussion, the verbjpo, and the Bohairic has the verb mise (except in John
3:6; 1 John 5:1a, 18b, where it has the substantive misi, "offspring," "gen­
eration"). The difficulty is, however, that the Syriac and Coptic verbs used
in the translations are just as ambiguous as the Greek verb γενναν: they can
mean both "to give birth to" and "to beget." 6 So these ancient translations
do not yield very much for our topic; only the Latin translations are unam­
biguous in preferring "to be born of God."
We turn to modern translations. In the English translations which I
consulted, the rendering of γεννασθαι έκ by "to be born of" is clearly
dominant. The King James Version (1611) offers it in all passages under
discussion, with the exception of 1 John 5:1b, 18b, where the translation
"is begotten of" has been preferred. The Revised Standard Version (1946)
and the New Revised Standard Version (1989) have "to be born of," except
in 1 John 5:1, where the RSV has "child" twice, and the NRSV once only,
in v. lb. The New English Bible (1961) and its revision, the Revised Eng-
lish Bible (1989), tend to prefer the relatively free translation "to be Gods
child" and the like in 1 John, except in 5:18b, where we read "the Son of
God." In the Gospel, "to be born of/from" is more or less standard, except
that the NEB has in John 1:13 "the offspring of God himself."
A look at some German and French translations yields the same picture.
Martin Luthers translation (1522; see also the revised version of 1984)
consistently has "geboren werden von/aus." The Einheitsübersetzung
(1980) has this translation in Johns Gospel, but in 1 John it prefers "stam-
men von," except in 5:18b, where it has "der von Gott gezeugte." The
French translation of Louis Segond (1880), the Bible de Jérusalem (1956)
and the Traduction Oecuménique de la Bible (1975-1976) always have
"naître de," except that, in the latter two, "engendrer" is used in the
instances where the expression έκ (τοΰ) θεοΰ γεννασθαι is supposed to
concern Jesus. The translator of Johns Gospel in the Bible de Jérusalem
(D. Mollai) preferred in John 1:13 the singular reading έγεννήθη, and
translated "lui que... Dieu a engendré."
The preference for "to be born of" is also visible in Norwegian and
Dutch translations. Both the Norwegian Bibelen (1930) and Det nye tes-
tamente (2005) are consistent in translating γεννασθαι έκ in the Johannine
writings by "â vaere f0dt av," "to be born of." 7 Dutch Bible translations
almost universally render "geboren worden uit" ("to be born of"), so the
Statenvertaling (1637), the Nieuwe Vertaling of the Netherlands Bible
Society (1939), the revised Willibrordvertaling (1995) and the Nieuwe
Bijbelvertaling (2004). The latter two prefer in 1 John 5:18b "de Zoon van
God" ("the Son of God"), and "de Zoon, die uit God geboren werd" ("the
Son, who was born from God") respectively. The Leidse Vertaling (1912)
and the Petrus Canisiusvertaling (1929) also follow the general trend, but
they show exceptions to the rule. They have in 1 John 5: lb the translations
"door Dezen verwekt is" and "door Hem is verwekt" respectively (ET in
both cases: "has been begotten by Him"). The capital shows in both cases
that the clause has been read as a statement about God. The Leidse Verta-
ling has something comparable in John 1:13 ("verwekt zijn... uit God,"
ET: "have been begotten from God").
From this (very incomplete) survey of modern translations, a clear trend
appears to translate γεννασθαι in the Johannine passages under discussion
as "to be born" (or its equivalent in Dutch, German or French). This sug­
gests that the free translations of έκ τοΰ θεοΰ γεννασθαι as "to be a child
of God" and the like, which we sometimes found in 1 John, are just
paraphrases of the translation "to be born of God." The passages where
sometimes the translation "to be begotten by God" has been preferred, are
John 1:13; 1 John 5:1b, 18b. It is easily understood why these are the
exceptions: in John 1:13 there is the contrast between "the will of man"
and "God," in 1 John 5:1a the reference to τον γεννήσαντα ("the one who
begat") makes the translation "the one begotten by him" obvious, and in
1 John 5:18b the need may have been felt to differentiate between the
perfect participle γεγεννημένος and the aorist participle γεννηθείς (whether
or not the latter is supposed to refer to Jesus).
While Bible translators strongly tend to interpret γεννασθαι in this
Johannine idiom as "to be born," modern commentators are not so unani­
mous. There are scholars who appear to assume, without much further
reflection, that the translation "to be born" is the correct one. 8 Often, how­
ever, this translation is preferred, but it is said somewhere that γεννασθαι
can also be rendered, maybe even more literally, by "to be begotten." 9
Concerning 1 John, D. Rusam explicitly argues that the translation "to be
born" is the correct one; 10 his position will be discussed below. In W. Bauers
commentary on John, both translations (and the exegesis that corresponds
to them) are presented as equivalent, even connected possibilities. In his
study of the Johannine concept of divine sonship, M. Vellanickal argues
that in his use of έκ τοΰ θεοΰ γεννασθαι, the author of John and 1 John
"deliberately does not envisage the different moments of conception and
birth." By consequence, the two translations "to be begotten by God" and
12
"to be born of God" are interchangeable to him.
There are, however, also commentators, of both Johns Gospel and 1
John (and not the least, I would say), who prefer for γεννασθαι the transla­
tion "to be begotten." CK. Barrett, for instance, writes on John 3:3:
"γενναν is commonly used of the fathers act, 'to beget', and this is proba­
bly the right sense here; but it is occasionally used of the mother also, 'to
13
bring forth', 'to bear'." Barrett refers in passing to H. Odeberg, who con­
14
sidered "water and Spirit" together (John 3:5) as a kind of spiritual semen,
but Barrett thinks it is more likely that these words refer to Christian bap­
tism as the means by which the believer receives the Spirit. 15 R. Bultmann
is explicit on John 1:13 and the passages in 1 John: they speak of a
"Zeugung aus Gott." 16 Concerning John 3:3-8, Bultmann thinks that
John's source spoke of divine begetting, but the evangelist interpreted
this in the sense of divine rebirth, for according to Bultmann, άνωθεν in
John 3:3, 7 has to mean "again." 17 The latter assertion is, however, dubious,
if we take into account John 3:31; 19:11, 23, where άνωθεν cannot have
any other meaning than "from above" (cf. η. 5 above). In his commentary
on the Johannine Epistles, R. Schnackenburg translates in all passages in
1 John "aus Gott gezeugt" or something similar, and presupposes this
translation in his exegesis; 18 he even speaks of "die feste joh. Vorstellung
von der 'Zeugung aus Gott'." In his (later) commentary on John's
20
Gospel, he is quite clear about 1:13: it concerns the "Zeugung aus Gott."
On John 3:3-8, he is less consistent: although in his translation, he renders
21
γεννασθαι as "geboren werden," he speaks in the explanation that follows
22
of both "Geburt" and "Zeugung," gradually preferring the latter.
Other scholars consistently prefer "to be begotten" as the best transla­
tion. In his monograph on the Johannine concept of "life," F. Mussner
23
states that "Zeugung" is a more adequate translation than "Geburt."
24
R.E. Brown offers the translation "to be begotten" in John 1:13; 3:3-8,
and in his notes he explains that although the rendering "to be born" is also
25
possible, John's idea of divine agency favours "to be begotten." All
instances in 1 John are translated and interpreted by him as concerning
26
divine begetting. H.-J. Klauck is equally unambiguous concerning
1 John: "gezeugt werden" is the translation to be preferred. 27 L.E. Keck
prefers the translation "to be begotten" to "to be born" in John 1:13; 3:3-8,
with the argument that "the point concerns the origin of life rather than
the birthing process itself." 28 In 1 John, J. Beutler translates "gezeugt
werden," but sometimes, he varies by "stammen von." 29
Two general remarks should be made at this point. First, almost all
authors who prefer "to be begotten," refer at some point in their argument
to 1 John 3:9, where it is said about the one begotten by God, that "his
seed abides in him" (σπέρμα αύτοΰ εν αύτφ μένει). They take this phrase
(to which I shall return below) to mean that God's seed abides in the
believer, and consider such speaking of divine seed as a serious argument
in favour of their translation. Secondly, the reason why several authors take
a rather firm stand on "to be begotten" to be the preferable translation in
John 1:13 and the 1 John passages, but are more hesitant about John 3:3-8,
is probably that in 3:4, Nicodemus retorts to Jesus' words on "being begot­
ten from above" as the condition to see the kingdom of God (3:3) by say­
ing: "How can a man γεννηθηναι once he is old? Can he enter a second
time into the womb of his mother and γεννηθηναι?" In Nicodemus's sec­
ond question, γεννηθηναι has to mean "to be born," as it temporally seems
to follow "entering a second time into the womb of his mother." In his
first question, its meaning is less obvious; it could even be there a
global indication of the whole process from begetting to birth. The point
is that when Nicodemus echoes Jesus' words, he omits the essential άνωθεν,
"from above." His misunderstanding of Jesus is a misunderstanding by
omission, 30 and because of the omission, the exact meaning of γεννηθηναι
becomes slightly vague. In any case, that γεννηθηναι without any adjunct
in 3:4 means "to be born," 31 is not decisive for what it means in the rest
of Jesus' dialogue with Nicodemus. Nicodemus misunderstands Jesus'
saying on the necessity to be begotten from above, and in his misunder­
standing he broadens the meaning of an essential concept used by the
Johannine Jesus. 32
The lexicon of H.G. Liddell, R. Scott and H.S. Jones, and the one of
W. Bauer, concur regarding the possible meanings of the verb γενναν. As
far as it refers to human procreation, it means with a male subject "to
beget," and with a female subject "to bring forth," "to bear." In a more
general sense, it can have the meaning "to produce," "to create," both in
the physical and in the metaphorical sense. 33 If the verb is used with a
male subject, εκ τίνος can be added to refer to the female by whom the
male begets the child (see, e.g., Matt 1:3, 5, 6). In the passive, εκ τίνος can
be added to indicate either the female that bears the subject of the verb
(see, e.g., Matt 1:16), or the male that begets the subject of the verb. The
latter construction is relevant to the use of έκ τοΰ θεοΰ γεννασθαι in the
Johannine writings, if only for the fact that in these writings, God is called
"Father" with great frequency (see, e.g., John 5:19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26;
10:29, 30, 32, 36, 38; 1 John 2:14, 15, 16, 22, 23, 24). 34
Nevertheless, Rusam has tried to demonstrate that in 1 John (and also in
John's Gospel), έκ τοΰ θεοΰ γεννασθαι should be translated and interpreted
as "to be born of God," and not as "to be begotten by God"; in his view,
the Johannine God plays the roles of both father and mother, and the
point of the expression under discussion is that God confers life. If I under­
stand Rusam well, his main argument is that generally in Greek usage, in
εκ τίνος γεννασθαι a noun indicating a female person follows the preposi­
tion έκ. 35 Such an assertion may be true as far as the NT is concerned, 36
but we should not forget then that the NT represents a very limited selec­
tion from ancient Greek literature. It is also quite possible that εκ τίνος
γεννασθαι is more often said of birth than of begetting, but the question
is how relevant such an observation is. It may well be that the passive con­
struction is more easily used of the birth of a child, and the active one of
the begetting of a child. So Rusam's reasoning should not be followed; instead,
we should have a look at the use of εκ τίνος γεννασθαι with a male agent
and thus with the meaning "to be begotten by" in Hellenistic Greek.
It may be true that, as Rusam states, εκ τίνος γεννασθαι with a male
agent does not occur extremely often, but there are more than enough occur­
rences to show that it was a perfectly acceptable expression in Hellenistic
Greek. Here are examples, mostly from the first centuries C.E. and
presented, as far as possible, in what seems to be the most probable chron­
ological order:
1. In the Suda, we find a definition, ascribed to both Hyperides and Hec-
ataeus: μοιχίδιον τον έκ μοιχού γεγεννημένον, "an illegitimate child is
the child begotten by an adulterer."
2. In Virt. 208, Philo says about Isaac and his sons: έκ τοΰ δοκιμασθέντος
κληρονόμου δύο δίδυμοι γεννώνται, "by the one approved as heir, two
twins were begotten."
3. Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 1.7.2: Deucalion and Pyrrha had two
sons, "Ελλην μεν πρώτος, δν έκ Διός γεγεννησθαι <ενιοι> λέγουσιν,
"the first was Hellen, whom some say to have been begotten by Zeus."
Pseudo-Apollodorus s Bibliotheca provides other examples as well, such
as 1.8.1: Μελέαγρον δν έξ "Αρεος γεγεννησθαι φασι, "Meleager, whom
they say to have been begotten by Ares"; 2.5.1, where the Nemean lion
is said to be έκ Τυφώνος γεγεννημένον, "begotten by Typho"; 3.91.6,
where Callirhoe speaks of τους γεγεννημένους έξ Άλκμαίωνος, "the
ones begotten by Alcmaeon."
4. According to Memnon, frg. 14 Jac, Ptolemaeus Keraunos married his
halfsister Arsinoe, τους έκ Λυσιμάχου δε παιδας αύτη γεγεννημένους
αναιρεί, "and he killed the sons begotten by her by Lysimachus."
5. Plutarch, Def. orac. 415E 4: thirty years is the period in which γεννώντα
παρέχει τον έξ αύτοΰ γεγεννημένον ό γεννήσας, "the begetter sets the
one begotten by him begetting," that is, the period within which a son
becomes a father himself.
6. Pseudo-Plutarch, De fluviis 13.3, speaks of Αιγέσθιος ό γεννηθείς έκ
τοΰ Διός, "Aegesthius, who had been begotten by Zeus."
7. Chariton, Chaer. 2.11.5: when Callirhoe, pregnant by Chaereas, is
going to marry Dionysius, she speaks of το έξ άλλου γεννώμενον, "that
what was begotten by another man." In 2.2.3, Dionysius speaks of το
έξ έμοΰ γεννώμενον, "that what is begotten by me."
8. In Lucian, Dial. d. 20.14, Aphrodite says to Paris about Ledas daughter
Helena, that she is έκ κύκνου γεγεννημένην, "begotten by a swan"
(which is Zeus in disguise).
9. According to Phlegon, De mirabilibus 2.6, the deceased Polycritus
appears to a crowd that threatens to burn his hermaphrodite child and
requires them to give him το παιδίον το έξ έμοΰ γεγεννημένον, "the
child begotten by me."
10. Aelianus, Nat an. 12.32, writes about Indian snakes who have killed
a human being: οΰτε οι έξ αύτοΰ γεννώμενοι γνωρίζουσι τον πατέρα,
"and the ones begotten by him do not recognize their father."
11. Cassius Dio, Historiae Romanae 16.57 r , tells that Scipio was supposed
έκ τοΰ Διός ές δράκοντα έν τη <προς τήν> μητέρα αύτοΰ συνουσία
μεταβαλόντος γεγεννησθαι, "to have been begotten by Jupiter turned
into a serpent during the intercourse with his mother."
12. According to the Historia Alexandri Magni, ree. α, 1.30.3-4, Alexan­
der the Great remembers his mother saying ώς έξ "Αμμωνος έγεννήθη,
"that he had been begotten by Ammon" (the Egyptian god Amon),
and he says to the god: ει αληθεύει <ή> μήτηρ έκ σοΰ με γεγεννησθαι,
χρησμφδησόν μοι, "if my mother rightly says that I have been begot­
ten by you, deliver me an oracle."
13. In Γ Sim. 2:2, Simeon says of himself: έγώ έγεννήθην έξ 'Ιακώβ τοΰ
πατρός μου υιός δεύτερος, "I was begotten by my father Jacob as his
second son."
14. According to Irenaeus, Haer. 3.30, the Ebionites asserted about Jesus
έξ Ιωσήφ αυτόν γεγεννησθαι, "that he had been begotten by Joseph."
See also 3.33: τον δεύτερον 'Αδάμ λέγειν αυτούς έξ Ίωσηφ γεγεννησθαι,
"they say that the second Adam had been begotten by Joseph."
15. In the Pseudo-Clementine Homilies 6.2, Pluto, devoured by his father
Cronos, is called γεννηθέν έξ αύτοΰ βρέφος, "the child begotten by
him."
16. Scholia in Aeschylum (scholia vetera), sch. 1 c on Sept. : έκ τοΰ Άγήνορος
έγεννήθησαν ό Κάδμος και ό Κίλιξ και <ή> Ευρώπη, "by Agenor were
begotten Cadmus, Cilix and Europa."
17. Scholia in Homeri Iliadem (scholia vetera), on //. 2.547: Erichthonius is
said to be γεννηθέντος έκ τοΰ Ηφαίστου, "begotten by Hephaestus."
The examples of the above list (which is by no means complete) are spread
in time and geographical area, and the begetters to which they refer, are
gods and divine beings, human beings and animals. The passages quoted
have not been influenced by the Johannine language of έκ τοΰ θεοΰ γεννασθαι.
They clearly show that γεννασθαι έκ with a male agent was a normal way
of speaking, meaning "to be begotten by."
Of course variants of the expression occur as well. Both the male and
female agents that together produce offspring can be mentioned after the
preposition, so that the two primary meanings of γενναν, "to beget" and
"to give birth," are present at the same time. Instead of the preposition έκ,
38
we also find από or ύπό with the genitive. This is not surprising, given the
fact that with the passive, ύπό with the genitive is the most usual way to
39
express the agent, but άπό is also fairly frequent in this role, and έκ is
40
found as well to indicate the agent with the passive. The three preposi­
tions that can be used for the male agent with the passive γεννασθαι are
apparently, to a certain extent, interchangeable, but in any case, έκ is quite
41
normal in this context, so that έκ τοΰ θεοΰ γεννασθαι in the Johannine
writings should be translated as "to be begotten by God."
In addition to these lexical and grammatical considerations, there is also
an exegetical argument (already hinted at above) for preferring this transla­
tion. In 1 John 3:9, we read: πας ό γεγεννημένος έκ τοΰ θεοΰ άμαρτίαν ού
ποιεί, δτι σπέρμα αύτοΰ έν αύτώ μένει, "everyone who has been begotten
by God does not do sin, because his seed abides in him." Before this state­
ment can function in the argument, some obscurities in it have to be clar­
ified. The possessive genitive αύτοΰ can refer in theory to either God or the
believer ("everyone who has been begotten by God"); but as the latter pos-
sibility does not make sense, we have to prefer the former. The questions
are then: does σπέρμα αύτοΰ mean "Gods offspring" or "Gods semen,"
and to whom does αύτω refer?
In itself, σπέρμα may obviously mean "offspring"; that is the meaning of
the word wherever it occurs in Johns Gospel (7:42; 8:33, 37), and it is
frequently found elsewhere (see in the NT, e.g., Mark 12:19-20; Gal 3:16;
Rev 12:17). "God's offspring" could then refer either to Christ or to
the Christians. If it refers to Christ, αύτω has to refer to the Christian, and
the resulting idea that Christ abides in the believer is certainly Johannine
(see John 6:56; 15:4-5). The difficulty is, however, that Christ is called
"offspring of David" or "offspring of Abraham" (e.g., in Rom 1:3;
2 Tim 2:8), but "he is never called the sperma of God." 4 2 If "Gods
offspring" refers to the Christians, 43 αύτω has to refer to God, and again,
the resulting idea of the believer abiding in God is Johannine (see, e.g.,
1 John 2:6; 4:13). Here, however, we run once more into the problem that
the terminology would be most unusual: Christians are called "offspring of
Abraham" (Gal 3:29; Heb 2:16) or of the woman who gave birth to the
Messiah (Rev 12:17), but not "offspring of God." If Christ or the Chris­
tians are described as the σπέρμα of somebody, this somebody is a human
being, not God. Besides, apart from the passage under discussion Johan­
nine language is consistent in calling Jesus the υιός, "son," of God, and the
Christians the τέκνα, "children," of God (see, e.g., in the immediate con­
text of the passage under discussion: 1 John 3:1, 2, 8, 10, 23).
Interpreting σπέρμα αύτοΰ as "God's offspring" in 1 John 3:9 appar­
ently leads nowhere. We have to translate "God s seed," and we have to
suppose that σπέρμα stands in some way for God's generative power. More
specifically, it can stand for either God's word or God's Spirit. The former
interpretation finds support in passages such as Jas 1:18 and 1 Pet 1:23,
but in the Johannine writings, God's word and his begetting are not associ­
ated. The latter interpretation, that the seed stands for God's Spirit, fits in
very well with John 3:5, 8, where the believer is said to be "begotten of the
44
Spirit," and seems to be the preferable one.
So the way in which 1 John 3:9 speaks of "Gods seed," supports the
translation of έκ τοΰ θεοΰ γεννασθαι as "to be begotten by God." This pas­
sage from 1 John also confronts us with the limits of the metaphor of
procreation in its application to God and his Spirit, for in the human pro­
cess of procreation the seed does not "abide," whereas the Spirit "abides"
with those in whom God has generated life (cf. John 14:16-17). The met­
aphor is also, so to speak, transcended by the reality aimed at insofar as in
the process of spiritual procreation, there is no female principle; there is
only God, also called "Father," who begets, no mother is mentioned at the
divine level. In this respect, Johannine thought shows some similarity
to Philos thinking. In Her. 62, Philo argues that Sarah, identified with
"Virtue," is the motherless principle έκ πατρός τοΰ πάντων θεοΰ μόνου
γεννηθεισα, "begotten by her father, the God of all, alone" (Philo does so
on the basis of Abrahams words to Abimelech in Gen 20:12: "She is truly
my sister from the father, not from the mother"). Later in the same treatise
(216), he says that God εβδομάδα την άμήτορα γεγέννηκεν έξ έαυτοΰ
μόνου, "has begotten seven, the motherless one, from himself alone."
Moses found, according to Philo {Mos. 2.210), that the holy seventh day
was άμήτορα... έκ μόνου πατρός σπαρεισαν άνευ σποράς καί γεννηθεΐσαν
άνευ κυήσεως, "motherless... sown by the Father alone without seed and
begotten without conception." In both the Johannine writings and Philo,
there is on the divine level only one generating principle, represented as
male and begetting. How the child that is begotten, comes into the world,
is a question that is not asked and that is actually irrelevant, because God's
life-giving activity is the point of the metaphor.
In spite of the almost universal tendency of Bible translators, both ancient
and modern, to render the Johannine έκ τοΰ θεοΰ γεννασθαι as "to be born
of God," the evidence collected in the preceding section clearly points in
the direction of the alternative rendering "to be begotten by God" as
the correct one. The same can be said, mutatis mutandis, about άνωθεν
γεννασθαι and related expressions in John 3:3-8. We have seen that several
modern commentators of John's Gospel and 1 John prefer to translate
γεννασθαι in all these Johannine instances by "to be begotten"; they are
right. Future Bible translators should no longer slavishly follow the transla­
tion tradition, but instead take the evidence presented into account.
Admittedly, the two translations "to be born" and "to be begotten" do
not result in very divergent statements when the metaphor is transposed
into direct language: in both, God is said to be the source of the believer's
new life. However, either of the two translations involves other elements of
the metaphorical field of human reproduction, and thus leads to another
emphasis in direct statement. In contrast to "to be born," the translation
"to be begotten" clearly ascribes a metaphorical male sexual role to God: he
is compared to a father who begets children. Perhaps some will not like this
male aspect in the representation of God very much, but it is simply
the way the Johannine God is pictured. The male sexual role metaphori­
cally ascribed to God emphasizes divine agency: God is the one who initi­
ates the new life of the believer. A translation of John's Gospel or 1 John
should leave the metaphor intact and pass on this side of the Johannine
view of God to the reader or hearer. Only then hermeneutical questions
can be asked.
A final issue concerns the origin of the Johannine metaphor of divine
begetting. Old Testament and Judaism yield some materials that may have
served as inspiration for it, 45 but the overall result is not impressive. There
are a few parallels in the NT. 4 6 It has been observed more than once that
Hellenistic thought, mystery cults and gnosticism insofar as they are more
or less contemporary with the Johannine writings, display verbal similari­
ties but no exact parallels. 47 Closest to Johannine thought in this respect is
Philo, who in his allegorical explanation has Sarah, the patriarchs or the
number seven be begotten by God. 4 8 The difference is obviously that in
Philo's thought, God begets abstract entities and souls, while in Johannine
thought, he begets people of flesh and blood to a new life. The Johannine
author (or authors) apparently takes up an extant but not very widespread
motif, and makes it into one of his fundamental images to describe the
relationship between God and the believer. This relationship is "eternal
life" (see esp. John 17:3), and eternal life starts with the Christian being
"begotten by God" through the Spirit in baptism as the confirmation of
his or her belief in Jesus (John 3:5). 49