It is generally accepted that δικαιοσύνη ("righteousness," "justice") plays a
crucial role in the Sermon on the Mount (Matt 5-7) (henceforth SM).
Five of the seven occurrences of δικαιοσύνη in Matthew are found in the
SM, namely, in 5:6, 10, 20; 6:1, and 33. (The other two instances are in
Matt 3:15 and 21:32.) In the other canonical gospels, there are altogether
only three instances (Luke 1:75; John 16:8, 10). The remarkable concen­
tration of the term in the SM indicates an important theme of the SM. 1
This conclusion is strengthened by the fact that the term occurs in strate­
gically important locations in the composition of the SM. Let us therefore
first briefly review the composition of the SM.
Scholars are in relative agreement about the lower level units of the
SM, although there is difference of opinion about the way these units are
connected to one another on a macrolevel or about the overall rationale
2
of the composition. My own proposal (offered here as a working hypoth­
esis without detailed argument) is that the composition of the SM may be
analysed roughly in terms of the parts of an ancient speech. 3 The outline
of the composition is then as follows:
The most significant implication of the proposed view of the composi­
tion is that the propositio in 5:17-20 gives an indication of the theme
of the SM as a whole. 4 Most scholars recognize its function as an
introduction, but they differ as to whether it is intended as introduction
6
to 5:21-48, 5:21-7:12, or 5:21-7:27. As propositi, w. 17-20 in fact do
all of these by moving from the specific to the general: the reference to the
7
topos of upholding and interpreting the law (5:17-19) prepares the way
for what follows immediately in 5:21-48, but v. 20 then broadens the
scope of the theme by demanding of the disciples a δικαιοσύνη exceeding
8
that of the religious leaders who interpreted and exemplified this law.
This theme is developed in the body of the SM as a whole (5:21-7:12), as
can be seen from the references to δικαιοσύνη in 6:1 and 6:33, and from
the fact that the Golden Rule in 7:12, generally recognized as the closing
9
statement of the body, refers back to these verses. Verses 17-19 thus link
directly to the first part of the body of the SM (5:21-48), which has as its
theme the interpretation of the law, while v. 20 points to an exceeding
δικαιοσύνη as the overarching theme of the SM.
In addition to being a crucial element of the closing summary of the
propositio in 5:20, the term δικαιοσύνη also occurs in other strategically
important locations. It is found at the very beginning, the exordium of the
SM, in 5:6 and 10, important central and closing positions of the primary
series of Beatitudes. The next occurrence of δικαιοσύνη after 5:20 is in 6:1,
which summarizes the principle of the second part of the body of the SM
(6:1-18), namely, that δικαιοσύνη should not be practised in order to be
honoured by people. If 6:1 serves as introduction to the second part, 6:33
provides a closing statement to the third part. Like 6:1 it also functions
beyond its immediate context and formulates a basic principle of the SM,
namely, that seeking δικαιοσύνη should be the disciples' first priority. 10
δικαιοσύνη is thus clearly a central theme in the SM. The term occurs
in strategic locations throughout the composition, often in formulations
expressing general principles of the SM. In this article I do not, however,
intend to focus on the meaning of δικαιοσύνη as such. 11 Instead, I want
to consider the way justice, as an important component of δικαιοσύνη,
functions within the logic of the argumentation of the SM, and to
show how this, in conjunction with δικαιοσύνη, contributes to the over­
all meaning of the SM.
To gain some perspective on the SM s treatment of justice, let us first
look at one of the most influential ancient analyses of δικαιοσύνη, namely,
that offered in Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics bk. 5.
Although Aristotle's ethics does not simply reflect popular morality, he
certainly takes his point of departure in common notions of justice. 13 Aristo­
tle observes that there is a twofold understanding of δικαιοσύνη, namely,
δικαιοσύνη as a general virtue and as a more specific virtue {Eth. Nie. 5.1). 14
In popular thought δικαιοσύνη was often considered the all-encompassing
virtue, a view already formulated by Theognis (6th cent. BCE): εν δε
δικαιοσύνη συλλήβδην πασ' αρετή 'στι ("In justice all virtue is subsumed"). 15
Plato, in particular, applied the evaluation "just" in relation to virtuous
conduct in general, that is, someone may be described as "just" if he lives
16
a principled life. Justice as a relational concept indicating the appropriate
17
relationship or proportionality between two entities was therefore con­
18
sidered the norm for all behaviour and for all relationships. Aristotle accepts
this broad view of δικαιοσύνη as a comprehensive virtue, although he quali­
fies it as "the perfect virtue in relation to the other" (τελεία άρετη προς
έτερον; Eth. Nie. 5.1.1129b26-27), that is, the social virtue par excellence.
19
In this sense, δικαιοσύνη has the wider meaning of "righteousness."
In the Nicomachean Ethics Aristotle is however more interested in "par­
ticular" justice, that it, justice that is not identical with virtue, but that
forms part of it {Eth. Nie. 5.2.1130al4-b29). Particular justice is concerned
with the equal distribution of goods which constitute good or bad fortune
(δσα ευτυχία καί ατυχία; Eth. Nie. 5.1.1129b3), that is, goods such as
honour, wealth and security (τιμή, χρήματα, σωτηρία; 5.2.1130b2; cf.
1130b31-32). 20 As we shall see in a moment, Aristotle divides particular
justice in two further forms, but once again it is clear that his analysis is
based on popular conceptions. Justice was popularly defined as "to render
21
to each his due." In the wisdom tradition justice was also seen to be at
work in the appropriate correlation between one's actions and their con­
sequences (as rewards or as punishments), with the deity as the ultimate
22
guarantor of such justice.
Aristotle divides particular justice into "distributive" (διανεμητικόν) and
"corrective" (διορθωτικόν, έπανορθωτικόν) justice (5.2.1130b30-1131al;
5.4.1132al8). 23 Distributive justice ensures the equal distribution of goods
in a common enterprise, such as a business transaction. 24 Aristotle takes
great pains to argue that the equality (ισότης) entailed in distributive jus­
tice is not a simple equality between terms (i.e., χ equals y), but rather
a proportionate equality between the goods and the persons involved
(i.e., person A : person Β :: benefit χ : benefit y; or person A : benefit χ ::
person Β : benefit y) (5.3.1131al5-b24; 5.5.1133a31-b6). A business
transaction, for example, will be considered just if both persons A and Β
consider the goods χ and y that they exchange to be equal in value (but
not of course exactly the same, which would simply mean that they give
one another the exact same items). Corrective justice entails the correc­
tions of an inequality created through an act of injustice; it attempts to
restore the "mean" (το μέσον) or balance disturbed by the unjust act (5.4).
This kind of justice is therefore concerned with the preservation and res­
toration of equality. 25 Aristotle argues against the notion that corrective
justice simply consists in "repayment" (το άντιπεπονθός), that is, the
principle of retaliation (the ins talionis) (5.5.1132b21-1133a2). 26 Justice
requires proportionate punishment, instead, just as we have a commensu­
rable rather than an exact exchange of goods. 27
Proportionate equality in both forms of particular justice implies that
someone should be treated according to merit (κατ' άξίαν, 5.3.1131a24-
29). 28 The principle of merit or worth entails, amongst other things, that
who one is and what one does be taken into account when justice is
administered. In the Athenian democracy, for example, a free-born citizen
would be treated differently from a foreigner or a slave.
Aristotle qualifies his treatment of δικαιοσύνη in a significant manner
by introducing the notion of equity, that is, επιείκεια (also translated "rea­
sonableness" or "fairness"). 29 According to Aristotle, equity is a "superior"
form of justice correcting and transcending a "strict justice" based on a
literal interpretation of the law. 30 Aristotle refers to equity from two per­
spectives. The first is from the perspective of the person interpreting
the law: Because a law is always a general statement intended to cover
a wide variety of situations, it cannot provide for every specific case
(5.10.1137bl 1-19). In some instances it is therefore necessary to "cor­
rect" a law in order to ensure that justice prevails. Instead of following
the law to the letter, equity tries to take the purpose of the law or the
intention of the lawgiver into account as it applies to specific cases
(5.10.1137b 19-27). 31 An ancient commentator on Aristotle's Nicomachean
Ethics therefore describes επιείκεια as a form of δικαιοσύνη "aiming at [or
trying to reach\ στοχαστική] what is just." 32
The second perspective on equity is that of the person having a right
to justice: the "equitable" or reasonable person often takes for himself
less than he is rightly entitled to. 3 3 One of the reasons is perhaps that
the well-being of a social community depends on the benevolent involve­
ment (φιλία) of its citizens in which the requirements of a strict justice
34
are transcended.
Discussion of δικαιοσύνη of course continued after Aristotle. Philoso­
phers of the Stoa concentrate on distributive justice, but they also return
to the idea of δικαιοσύνη as a general social virtue, which includes other
virtues such as χρηστότης ("goodness"), εύκοινωνησία ("good fellowship"),
εύσυναλλαξία ("fair dealing"), and ευσέβεια ("piety"). 35 In the philosophi­
cal syncretism characterizing the Greco-Roman period from the first cen­
tury BCE onwards we find an eclectic combination of various definitions. 36
Clement of Alexandria is a good example among early Christian authors
of such eclecticism: δικαιοσύνη is άπονεμητικη κατ' άξίαν {Paed. 1.8.64.1);
it creates harmony (συμφωνία) between the various parts of the soul
{Strom. 4.26Λ63.4); it expresses itself in not being greedy (μη πλεονεκτειν;
ibid., 4.25.161.2); and it is the all-encompassing virtue (παντελής αρετή;
ibid.,7.3.17.3). 37
When we now return to the SM, it has to be borne in mind that the con­
cept of justice functions on two levels in the text, both as an explicit
theme and as an implicit notion underlying much of the argumentation.
I do not intend to present an exhaustive analysis of justice in the SM,
but will confine my discussion to some prominent examples of how the
notion of justice is used.
As we have seen, δικαιοσύνη is mentioned twice in the Beatitudes, in 5:6,
and again in 5:10. Although the composition of the Beatitudes is heavily
38
debated, the macarisms containing δικαιοσύνη are highlighted in several
respects: (a) Verse 6a is the only macarism with two adjectives or partici­
ples (i.e. πεινώντες και διψώντες) identifying the quality of the disciple,
and 6a and 10a are in fact the longest of the eight macarisms in this series
(5:3-10). The relative importance of a statement is often emphasized rhe­
39
torically by an increase in length. (b) Verses 6 and 10 are the only two
macarisms of this series referring to the same quality, namely, δικαιοσύνη.
(c) The macarism in v. 10 receives further emphasis by the fact that its δτι
clause is identical to that of v. 3. This clause differs both syntactically and
as regards to the extent of its claim from the other δτι clauses in the Beati­
tudes. These verses therefore form a framing inclusio for the series, which
appears to lift out being poor in spirit (v. 3a) and being persecuted
because of δικαιοσύνη (v. 10a) as superordinate qualities to which the
other qualities in w. 4-5 and 7-9 are subordinated.
The fact that the term δικαιοσύνη occurs twice in the exordium is of
particular importance because the introduction to the SM indicates the
qualities required of a disciple. From 5:6 we learn that δικαιοσύνη is
something that should continuously be desired, 40 while 5:10 refers to the
vulnerability of those practising δικαιοσύνη. Here and elsewhere in the
SM δικαιοσύνη in my view has to do with the right way of life expected
of the disciples, rather than with a righteousness received as gift from
God. 4 1 The inclusio connecting the final beatitude in 5:10 with the first
beatitude in 5:3 suggests a close relationship between being persecuted for
the sake of δικαιοσύνη and being conscious of ones spiritual need. 42
In addition to the explicit mention of the theme of δικαιοσύνη in w. 6
and 10, the notion of justice is also implicitly present in the relationship
between the qualities praised in the various macarisms and the rewards
promised for these qualities. The Greek term for "reward," μισθός, is
indeed explicitly used in this context (5:12). It is an important term
closely related to δικαιοσύνη. 43 Six of the fourteen occurrences of this term
in the gospels are found in the SM (5:12, 46; 6:1, 2, 5, 16). 44 What is
remarkable in the Beatitudes, however, is the way the correlation between
quality and reward often contradicts popular conceptions of justice,
which require a just relationship between ones actions or qualities and
the reward or punishment that follows, that is, that one should be treated
κατ' άξίαν. 45 Although a just correlation appears to exist in, for example,
5:7 (it is only fair that those who are compassionate should also receive
compassion) and in 5:8 (the pure in heart is similar to God and therefore
deserve to enter into his presence), in other macarisms the normal just
relationship between achievement and reward is inverted: in w. 3, 4, and
5 it is not the meritorious that are awarded, but the needy and the vul­
nerable. 46 Need, instead of merit, provides the basis for a reward.
The propositio, as we have seen, refers to the interpretation of the law that
we find in the first part of the body of the SM, but it also indicates the
theme of the SM in general. The rather terse statements in 5:17-19 may
be interpreted as demanding an acribie adherence to the letter of the law, 47
but in view of what follows it is more probable that the propositio refers to
48
a qualitatively rather than quantitatively different approach to δικαιοσύνη.
Jesus's affirmation that he came to fulfil the law (v. 17a) would then refer
to the interpretation and application of the law, rather than to just keep­
ing its commandments. From the examples that follow in 5:21-48 it appears
that such an interpretation of the law, going far beyond its literal mean­
ing, requires the same kind of insight and discrimination Aristotle
required of equity. 49
The important summary statement in 5:20 provides a challenge to the
disciples to apply δικαιοσύνη, 50 but little information on how to do so.
Although the SM gives a negative point of comparison (the δικαιοσύνη
of the scribes and Pharisees), it does not specify what an exceeding
δικαιοσύνη entails: 51 the latter remains an open-ended goal, although the
SM is presumably intended to provide some insight into what it entails. 52
The first part of the Body of the SM (5:21-48) focuses on the relationship
between δικαιοσύνη and the interpretation of the law. It consists of six
sections, the so-called antitheses. In each antithesis a traditional com­
mandment or precept is first cited and then interpreted in a way that is
53
apparently in contrast to the traditional interpretation. From the pre­
ceding statement in 5:20 the contrasting interpretation in each antithesis
is obviously intended as an indication of what is meant by the exceeding
δικαιοσύνη. It is not apparent why these six commandments have been
selected, or why they are presented in the sequence we find in the SM.
All six antitheses do however appear to deal with examples of conflict and
broken relationships and the final antithesis (5:43-48) clearly forms the
climax of the series. 54
Because of the legal context of the antitheses, the notion of justice plays
an important role in all of them. Here we will only look at the way justice
functions in some antitheses.
The first antithesis, Matt 5:21-26, begins with a reference to the ulti­
mate consequence of a broken relationship, that is, killing someone. The
tradition cited in v. 21, that someone who kills will have to give an
account in court, is based on conventional corrective justice: every crime
should receive an appropriate punishment. The contrasting interpretation
suggests that the moral problem underlying violence cannot be solved by
a casuistic interpretation of the law which attempts to prescribe a suitable
punishment for every transgression; the solution rather lies in healing and
restoring the broken relationships that lead to violence. This is done by
referring to three different contexts. 55
In the first of these (5:22) we find a rhetorical elaboration based on the
formulation of the tradition itself. The latter first identifies the transgression
(murder) and then the appropriate judicial response, namely, that one
should give an account in court. In the rhetorical elaboration three "trans­
gressions" are listed, each with the court to which the transgressor will
be accountable. The three courts are listed in an order of increasing
56
57
importance: the first refers to a local court, the second to the highest
58
59
Jewish court, and the third to the place of eternal punishment. It is
more problematic to determine the relationship between the different
transgressions, that is, becoming angry with someone, calling someone
"raka", and calling someone an idiot. With the information available to
us it is not possible to make a qualitative distinction between the use of
60
the Aramaic term raka and the Greek term μωρός. There is, however,
clearly a great qualitative difference between the transgression of murder
referred to in the tradition, and anger. Likewise, the use of pejorative
terms are clearly subordinate to anger as a more comprehensive category.
We thus encounter the absurd situation in v. 22 that one has to give an
account of increasingly lesser transgressions in increasingly more impor­
tant courts, with potentially greater punishments. Here the principle of a
just relationship between transgression and punishment is deliberately
overturned. By means of this paradoxical depiction of events the SM
emphasizes in a hyperbolical manner that any form of aggression against
another, no matter how small, is as good as murder. In terms of an exceed­
ing δικαιοσύνη violence should therefore not be handled by "correcting"
the crime by means of an appropriate punishment; one should rather attend
to the conflict that leads to violence.
In the second passage, 5:23-24, conflict is considered from a different
perspective. The situation is once again depicted in hyperbolic terms: it is
61
not intended as an example from real life that has to be followed liter­
ally. How likely is it that someone who probably had to travel several days
to get to the temple in Jerusalem and who bought a sacrificial animal
there, would be able to leave the animal with a temple official, go all
the way back home in order to be reconciled with his brother, before
returning to the temple to offer the sacrifice? The logistics required makes
62
this scenario improbable. The SM once again uses hyperbolical language
to emphasize that reconciliation with one s brother, that is, removing con­
flict between people, deserves priority above even important cult acts.
The key concept in this passage is therefore "first be reconciled" (πρώτον
διαλλάγηθι).
The third passage, 5:25-26, again has an unreal, hyperbolical character.
Too little information is given to determine who the guilty party is in the
legal conflict and whether the opponent really has sufficient grounds to take
the addressee to court. The rhetorical composition of the passage with the
climax figure at the end suggests that any legal conflict may have very seri­
ous consequences. The essence of the passage is that one should deal with
conflict while one still has the opportunity to do so, no matter whether
one is responsible for the conflict or not. The key phrase in this case, ϊσθι
εύνοών, "be well-disposed", indeed covers much more than required by the
circumstances: it not only refers to the removal of a conflict, but to a gen­
eral attitude of goodwill towards others, even those who oppose you.
We thus find a noteworthy progression between the three parts of the
contrasting interpretation of the first antithesis. In the first, the addressee
is angry with his brother; the brother is therefore considered the cause
of the conflict. In the second, it is the brother who thinks that the
addressee has done him wrong. In the third part we have a legal wrangle
in which any of the two parties could be responsible for the conflict.
There is an implicit warning against anger and conflict in the first part,
an emphasis on reconciliation in the second, and the requirement of a
general goodwill in the last. In all three passages the issue of conventional
justice or fairness is indeed suspended: it does not seem to matter whether
one has just cause to be angry with ones brother in v. 22, whether ones
brother has reason to have something against one in w. 23-24, or who
the guilty party is in the legal conflict of w. 25-26. The exaggerations
in all three passages contribute to an overturning of traditional principles
of fairness.
The same overturning of conventional justice is also at work in the fifth
antithesis (5:38-42). The section starts with a classical formulation of cor­
rective justice, "an eye for an eye," the so-called ius talionis or law of retali­
ation requiring that there be a direct relationship between crime and
punishment. The original intention of the ius talionis was to keep a pun­
ishment in proportion to the transgression. We have seen that Aristotle
disapproved of a direct form of retaliation, but other ancient authors like
Philo of Alexandria insisted upon it, because the application of this prin­
ciple was the only way to ensure the equality (ίσότης) required by justice
{Spec. leg. 3.181-204, esp. 181-182). 63
The contrasting interpretation in 5:39-42 again consists of three sub­
sections. The first (5:39) responds directly to the principle of retaliation,
but shifts the argument from a legal principle to a moral principle.
Against a persons right to retaliation, the principle of non-retaliation is
emphasized. 64 The verb άνθίστημι should here probably be interpreted as
"taking a position against." 65 The command μη άντιστήναι τω πονηρφ
thus implies that one should not take up a position balancing that of the
one doing evil, 66 that is, one should not act towards him as he does towards
you. Instead of retaliating one should give the opponent the opportunity
to do you even more injustice (5:39b). Here the text refers to the way one
should respond to the unjustified aggression of a malicious person.
In the second part (5:40-41) the text focuses on justified claims, but the
distributive justice on which they are based is again disturbed: in addition
to the shirt one owes someone because of an unpaid pledge, 67 one should
give him the more valuable cloak as well (5:40), and in addition to a sol-
diers right to compel one to carry or transport his pack for one mile, 68
one should allow him still another mile (5:41).
The third part (5:42) goes even further and refers to claims in general·.
one should not at all insist on either corrective or distributive rights, but
freely give to anyone who requests it of one without any guarantee of
repayment.
We thus find in this antithesis a radical interpretation of the law of
retaliation that seems to turn it on its head. Not only should one not
insist on the protection the law of retaliation provides against the aggres-
sion and unjustified claims of malicious people, one should even actively
expose oneself to further aggression, offer more than may justifiably be
required of one, and indeed respond positively to any demands on one s
property. Both corrective and distributive justice are transcended in the
process. An explicit rationale for this radical interpretation is not provided
in the text. 69 Betz may well be correct in suggesting that the Golden Rule
provides the hermeneutical key to this passage: the ethical thinking under-
lying the fifth antithesis attempts to anticipate violence and injustice and
to prevent it from being repeated. The sort of behaviour required in this
passage could contribute to breaking the vicious cycle of violence and to
persuade the person committing violence to stop. The person acting in
a non-retaliatory manner thus accepts the ethical responsibility for the
other demanded by the Golden Rule. 70 Not insisting on ones rights for
the sake of a higher righteousness reminds us of Aristotle s notion of
equity (επιείκεια), although equity in Aristotle's analysis does not goes so
far as to entail opening oneself to further abuse.
The final antithesis (5:43-48) forms the climax of the series. The pas­
sage takes as point of departure the conventional view that people should
be treated according to merit (cf. κατ' άξίαν in Aristotle, Eth. Nie. 5.3.
71
1131a24-29): friends as friends and enemies as enemies (5:43). In the
contrasting interpretation the balance of conventional justice is again dis­
turbed: to treat people as they deserve, that is, in relation to how they
treat you, is characteristic of humanity in general (5:46-47). One should
however ignore the claims of conventional justice and follow God's exam­
ple by treating all people (the good and the bad, the just and the unjust)
as friends and family, regardless of their actions (5:44-45, 48).
The passage also resumes the idea of a comparative δικαιοσύνη that we
found in 5:19-20 (cf. esp. περισσεύση, 5:20; περισσόν, 5:47), but here
the points of comparison are not the scribes and Pharisees, but the tax
collectors and Gentiles. The implication is that the former's δικαιοσύνη is
no more to be emulated than that of the latter. What should be emulated
instead is God's perfect justice (5:48) that cares for people and provides
for their needs regardless of who they are or what they do. 7 2
We should furthermore note the expectation that such exceptional
behaviour (περισσόν, 5:47) will receive a reward (μισθόν, 5:46). 73 This
expectation is in line with a common conception of justice that entails
that a good deed deserves a reward to restore the moral balance. The
notion of reward is continued in the next part and indeed constitutes an
important link between the two passages.
The second part of the body of the SM (6:1-18) explicitly deals with
practising δικαιοσύνη. The basic principle informing this part is given
in 6:1, and then illustrated by three examples taken from religious prac­
74
tice (i.e., δικαιοσύνη understood as piety).
The three religious duties in which the principle is applied are perform­
ing charity (6:2-4), prayer (6:5-6), and fasting (6:16-18). These religious
acts are typical expressions of piety in Second Temple Judaism and often
75
closely connected with δικαιοσύνη. Compared to the previous sections
of the SM the notion of a proportionately balanced justice is applied in a
surprisingly positive manner in these pericopes. The underlying idea in
each of the three sections is the same: a good deed deserves a reward
(μισθός). This view is explicitly formulated by Aristotle: δικαιοσύνη as
"that which is good for others" (άλλότριον... αγαθόν) should receive a
reward (μισθός) in the form of "honour and dignity" (τιμή καί γέρας). 76
The argument in the SM is based on distributive justice: if one receives
honour from other people, one has received ones reward in full, and
the requirements of distributive justice have been met. 77 If, however, one
avoids the honour of people by acting "in secret" (εν τω κρύπτω, 6:4, 6;
έν τω κρυφαίω, 6:18), God will see to it that one receives the reward owed
to one (αποδώσει, 6:4, 6, 18). The object should therefore be to seek ones
reward from God rather than from other people. What this reward entails
is not specified, but from other statements in the SM it may be inferred
that it has to do with participation in the kingdom of heaven. 78
We find a further reference to a proportionate justice in the second pas­
sage on prayer (6:7-15): God is requested to cancel our debts (όφειλήματα,
a term from distributive justice), 79 just as we do to our debtors (6:12). In
the explanation that follows it is explicitly stated that God s forgiveness is
proportionate to our willingness to forgive (6:14-15). 80
The third part of the body of the SM (6:19-34) looks at δικαιοσύνη from
the perspective of one's priorities: one should make the right choices, have
the right focus, the right goals in life. It concludes with the command to
seek God's kingdom and his δικαιοσύνη as one's first priority (πρώτον). 81
It is not clear whether "God's δικαιοσύνη" in v. 33 refers to the righteous­
ness exercized by him, 8 2 or the δικαιοσύνη required by him. 8 3 Verse 33
again formulates a general principle of the SM: 8 4 δικαιοσύνη has to be
sought continuously. 85 The motif of seeking returns in the next part.
The final part of the body of the SM loosely consists of two sections. The
first has to do with judgement and discrimination (7:1-6), the second
with actions and consequences (7:7-11). The first verses of chap. 7 pro­
vide a further example of conventional justice: one will be judged accord­
ing to the way one judges. Despite the danger of being overly censorious,
corrective judgment is nevertheless important in order to benefit others
(7:5). One should at the same time use discrimination in dealing with
people; the wrong benefit to the wrong person could have dire conse­
quences (7:6). This maxim seems to be related to the popular notion of
treating people according to merit.
A more unusual application of the principle of a just relationship
between action and consequence follows in 7:7-11. The mere fact of ask­
ing, seeking, knocking, that is, the willingness to express one's need, seems
to be rewarded: God gives good things (δόματα αγαθά) to those who ask.
It is the needy y those that seek, that are rewarded, not the deserving. We are
reminded of the very first sentence of the SM (5:3): "Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven."
In 7:12, the so-called Golden Rule, we find a final example of what may
be called the δικαιοσύνη calculus. The second sentence of v. 12 ("This is
the law and the prophets") refers back to 5:17 and thus forms an inclusio
which concludes the body of the SM. By referring back to the propositio,
the inclusio at the same time reminds us of the exceeding δικαιοσύνη
of 5:20. The Golden Rule thus provides a further indication of what an
exceeding δικαιοσύνη entails.
At first glance 7:12 appears to be a straightforward application of the
principle of proportionate justice: one should treat others as one expects
to be treated oneself. By itself, this maxim could be interpreted to mean
that one should ensure one s own future interest by acting in a way one
hopes will later rebound in one s favour. Bultmann, for example, refers to
the Golden Rule as "Moral eines naiven Egoismus." 86 In his classic study
of the Golden Rule Albrecht Dihle contends that the rule is ultimately
based on the positive aspect of the law of retaliation, the ius talionis.* 7
From this perspective, the principle of retaliation serves to maintain the
equilibrium between good and evil in the world. 88 According to Dihle's
interpretation of the Golden Rule, human behaviour is based on the
expectation that the other will react in an appropriate manner to restore
the moral balance. 89 More recently, scholars have however pointed out
that the Golden Rule does not have one fixed meaning, but should in
every case be interpreted within its context. 90 Within the context of the
SM, especially in view of the exhortation in 5:43-48 to follow Gods
example in caring for people without expecting a corresponding response,
the Golden Rule must have a more altruistic meaning. 91 The moral calcu-
lation involved here does not therefore entail finding a balance between
one's present conduct and future benefit (i.e., a form of enlightened self-
interest). Ones conduct should rather be measured against how one
compassionately imagines others would want to be treated. 92 Our under-
standing of what others need becomes the yardstick of our behaviour,
rather than our own rights. Popular notions of justice are thus once again
inverted. Focusing on the needs of others also goes far beyond Aristotle's
idea of equity that does not insist on one's own rights.
The SM concludes in the peroratio with various forms of warnings and
exhortations. The need for a just correlation between words and actions,
appearing and being, between who one is and what one does, is empha-
sized throughout. The way to life is only found with the appropriate effort
(7:14). Doing the will of God (7:21) 93 and obeying the message of the SM
(7:24) is the criterion of what is right, and leads to a secure life (7:25);
everything else is "lawlessness" (την άνομίαν, 7:23), and leads to ruin
(7:27). Only the way of life demanded by the SM gives entry into the
kingdom of heaven (cf. 7:21).
Despite the cursory and selective nature of the preceding discussion it
does allow us to draw some significant conclusions.
Aristotle's analysis of δικαιοσύνη clearly has interesting implications for
our understanding of justice in the SM. If Aristotle's analysis is based on
popular conceptions of justice (as I submit it is), a remarkable feature of
the SM is the way such popular conceptions is used in the argumentation
of the text. A popular view of justice, namely that there should be an
appropriate and fair correlation between what one does and what happens
to one, between what one deserves and what one may expect—in short,
that everyone should be given their due—informs not only the traditions
to which the SM responds, for example, the requirement that murder
should be answerable in court in 5:21, the ius talionis in 5:38, and the
precept that one should treat friends and enemies according to merit in
5:43; it also provides the logic for some of the SM's own teachings, for
example, on the reward to be expected for religious acts in 6:2-6, 16-18;
on forgiveness in 6:12, 14-15; and on judging others in 7:1-5. On the
other hand, the logic of popular justice is frequently overturned, for
example, in the SM's teachings on avoiding and resolving conflict in
5:22-26; on non-retaliation in 5:39-42; on treating all people as friends
and family in 5:44-48; and the Golden Rule in 7:12. Justice as it is com­
monly conceived is thus both accepted and rejected in the SM. Such
manipulation of expectations means that conventional justice becomes
suspect as a principle of conduct.
Aristotle's notion of equity as a superior form of justice that transcends
a literal interpretation of legal demands and that relativizes justice as a
proportionate equality of rights and merits indicates an awareness of the
need for discretion in applying justice, a need for going beyond a strict
justice for the sake of the greater good. In antiquity equity was therefore
interpreted as δικαιοσύνη aiming to attain what is just. 94 The overturning
of justice found in the SM is, however, of a radically different order than
Aristotle's equity.
Instead of conventional justice, we find in the SM the notion of an
open-ended δικαιοσύνη that exceeds what is expected (cf. 5:20, 47), a
δικαιοσύνη that always has to be attained, that is, to be sought and
desired (cf. 5:6; 6:33; also 7:7-11, 14). It cannot be captured in a defini­
tion or in legal principles, but requires a new way of thinking, a moral
imagination (7:12) that orients itself on God's perfect righteousness (cf.
5:45, 48; 6:26, 30, 32; 7:11).