Throughout the centuries Jews and Christians have produced commentar-
ies on their holy scriptures. The history of commentary writing is long,
and a look into it confronts the student with several genres, usages and
spiritual contexts that have determined the production of commentaries
and their use. That history will not be taken into consideration here, 2
although it is a presupposition for the fact that some of us still put our-
selves to writing such books, and, of course, for publishers to invest money
in publishing them.
But what is a commentary? 3 The title of this paper seems to presuppose
that we know the answer. If, however, we look up the word in Webster's
dictionary, we find that it defines a commentary as, among other things, "a
series of explanatory notes or annotations." Nothing is said about any
exposition of a text or interpretation of it, as we would expect and as some-
times an editor of a commentary series may delineate the purpose of the
series in question. 4
Actually, however, the definition in Webster's dictionary corresponds to
what a commentary was like in antiquity: notes or memoranda, for exam-
ple such as for a lecture, or from a lecture (as taken down by students), or
to a text, often without any systematic order. Thus, when Origen wrote
commentaries, they were precisely such notes to biblical books. Commen-
taries belonged to the lecture hall or lay on the lecturers desk. But if we
look for a running interpretation by Origen of a biblical text, it is to his
homilies that we are referred.
The preceding paragraph mentioned the "interpretation... of a biblical
text." When, however, Origen s commentaries and homilies deal with nar-
ratives, they raise a question that can be put to several commentators,
namely: do you comment on a text or on an event? Origen represents a
common way of reading in that he identifies the contents of a narrative
with an historical event, and it is this event that he discusses in his com-
mentaries and homilies. But along with text linguists and narratologists it
is useful to make a distinction between three worlds: the narrative world,
the world of narration and the historical world. 5 Thus, for example, in
their narratives about Jesus' entry into Jerusalem, Matthew and Luke each
presents a narrative world. (Narratologists may label it the diegetic level.)
The world of narration, on the other hand, is the one in which this narra-
tive is delivered by the narrator and received by the audience. (Narratolo-
gists sometimes call it the extra-diegetic level.) In that world Matthew
turns to his audience and Luke to his. The historical world, finally, is the
one in which the historical Jesus appeared around 30 C.E. in Palestine. In
consideration of these distinctions the following discussion will pertain to
commenting on texts, and this is true also when we turn to commentaries
on narratives.
In what follows a simple model of human communication will provide
us with a number of concepts by which to analyze how a commentary
functions as a piece of communication: 6
In a given Situation and with a certain Purpose a Sender communicates
a Message through a Text to a Recipient.
Let us apply this model to the passage in 1 Corinthians 1 where Paul
begins to argue against the Corinthian dissension. The Sender is of course
Paul, and the Recipients are the Corinthian Christian community. The
Situation that determines the Text is the dissensions of the addressee. Pauls
Message has primarily to do with his Purpose with regard to the Situation,
namely to suppress the dissensions and to provide an argument for why
they must do so. In his argument Paul also asks a couple of rhetorical ques-
tions, "Was Paul crucified for you?"; "Were you baptized into the name of
Paul?" (1 Cor 1:13). These queries reflect aspects of Pauls views on Christ,
on the importance of his, and on baptism, but they primarily function as
elements of his argument for a message with a precise purpose in a very
precise situation.
When exegetes interpret Pauls text they produce a text on Pauls text,
and the result is a second communication that can be described in this way:
Through a Text 2 a Sendee/the Interpreter, in a Situation 2 and with a Pur-
pose 2 interprets a Text to a Recipient 2 as containing the Message of the
Sender 1 with a certain Purpose 1 to Recipient 1 , who is in a given Situation 1 .
Applied to a New Testament professor who gives a class on 1 Corinthians,
we get the following: through a Text 2 , that is, his/her comments, a Sender 2 ,
that is, the teacher in question, in a Situation 2 , that is, in the class, inter-
prets Pauls Text to Recipients 2 , that is, the students, as being Paul s Mes-
sage to the Corinthians, with the Purpose to eliminate the dissensions. The
teacher does this with the Purpose to teach the students a bit of Pauline
exegesis.
Above reference was made to Webster's definition of "commentary,"
which actually corresponds to what commentaries were like in antiquity.
As a matter of fact modern N T exegetes are well acquainted with a com-
mentary that meets this definition, and that, accordingly, is something else
than a text-interpreting commentary of the kind presupposed in the model
of interpretation above. The work in question is of course P. Billerbecks
Kommentar zum Neuen Testamentaus Talmud und Midrasch.
Billerbecks quotations of and references to rabbinic passages are sup-
posed to shed light on the N T texts. 7 But what does this material tell a
present day reader about the diegetic world that, say, Mark presented to
his readers? Very little, unless one presupposes that the narrative world of
Mark is identical with the historical world from which Billerbecks mate-
rial is taken and which is also supposed to be similar to that of the histori-
cal Jesus.
We now turn to commentaries in the sense of the word we are used
to, and, as already indicated, the model of interpretation will thereby serve
as an analytic instrument. However, to mention "interpretation" means
approaching a field full of philosophical and hermeneutical mines. Already
words like "understand" and "interpret" are slippery and capable of several
meanings. The following discussion will largely keep away from herme-
neutics, but nevertheless a few words must be spent on "interpretation."
Following on the previous discussion, interpretation, broadly defined, is
the use of other, clarifying words to express the same contents as the text
interpreted. But, in addition, the word interpretation will also be used in
another, stronger sense and will stand for not just a clarifying, but a deep-
ening of the contents of the text interpreted. This comes close to what is
normally called interpretation, not least when biblical texts are concerned. 8.
Representing the matter in this way presupposes that the biblical texts
do not just mean anything whatever you like. To return to the communi-
cation model: through a text somebody, say, Paul, tells somebody, say, the
Corinthians, something in a certain situation with a certain purpose. The
present writer is of the opinion that it is possible for a commentator of this
text to catch fairly well what Paul seems to have told his readers. This is
true also of Mark as well as of Ben Sira and Epictetus. They are ambiguous
only to a certain degree.
Two remarks should be added: first, the approach here adopted means
focusing on what the addressees got out of the text. Secondly, the present
writer is not so conceited as to believe that his interpretations are decisive
answers to the question of what a text, say, by Mark, told its audience. It
must also be underlined that the interpretations can become more varied
when it comes to an interpretation in the stronger sense: when the inter-
preter tries to expand on an underlying basic ideology or on ideological
implications, for instance, of the text; still, only the first communication is
in view. So a present day interpreter may interpret Mark in a class, and not
only try to clarify what Mark told his readers, but also attempt to translate
this message, performing, say, some kind of demythologizing. The teacher
is still clarifying Marks message to his first century recipients, but wants
the students to see what was at stake on a deeper level. The ideas of the text
are not simply objects on a shelf in a museum of ideas but are humanly
interesting, we may even dare to say, existentially interesting.
So far for interpretation. When we now go on to discuss what a com-
mentator does when commenting a text, the model of interpretation will,
as stated, determine the course of the discussion. For the sake of clarity
the deliberations will be illustrated by examples from the New Testament,
mostly from the Gospel of Mark. 9
Thus, in a certain Situation Mark tells somebody something with a cer-
tain Purpose and does so through his Text. A certain commentator can be
interested in different elements ofthat model, e.g., in the Situation, that is,
in a given situation in the history of the early church. Another commenta-
tor may concentrate on the author, asking, e.g., how Mark thought, what
were his biases, etc.
So a commentary is a Text 2 on Text 1 , and this Text 2 is written with a
certain Purpose with regard to a Recipient 2 , that is, to the readers of the
commentary. Thus one question to be asked when writing a commentary
or studying one is: which Recipients does the writer of a commentary
have in view? Pious Bible readers? Students of divinity? The guild of schol-
arly exegetes? A writer may not necessarily choose only one group of
addressees, but the choice has consequences for where the accents of the
commentary are put. Thus, if a commentary's principal recipients are sup-
posed to be students of divinity, some energy might be spent on demon-
strating how a literary analysis of the texts leads to exegetical consequences,
and it also becomes important to show how the cultural background of
Recipents 1 colors the communication between the biblical author and his
first addressees.
Most commentators discuss how scholarly colleagues have dealt with
the different exegetical problems raised by the individual pericopes. This
has also to do with the issue of the audience. When a commentary richly
refers to how exegetes have dealt with a given text, this may certainly be
of use to students of exegesis and can teach them how others have inter-
preted a given text. Referring to the scholarly discussion of course also
means giving credit to the colleagues for their work. 10 But for the task of
interpretation these references mean little, and the Bible-interested lay
people do not bother about what Pesch or Gnilka has said concerning this
or thatpericope. 11
Thus the commentator tells somebody something about a given Text.
However, this Text is not, so to speak, just a naked text, but the commen-
tator's reading of it is determined by the fact that precisely he or she is the
one who reads it. This means focusing on the Sender of Text 2 . The writer
in question does not only apply certain methods, such as some kind of
reader-response criticism, but she or he is also a person of a certain charac-
ter, being rooted in a specific scholarly and/or religious tradition, having
particular experiences and prejudices, of which he or she is conscious only
of some. Is the exegete who produces the commentary a rationalist, a
somewhat refractory churchman, or something else entirely? The answers
to such questions are not without their interest to the readers of the com-
mentaries and can determine and indeed be most helpful in their reading.
When we now continue our discussion of how the factors of the inter­
pretation model are taken into account by a commentator, we will use as
an exemplary text the story of Jesus' baptism according to Mark 1:9-11.
What Mark says is communicated in an interplay between the factors
involved according to the communication model. A basic factor is of course
Mark's medium, the Text. In our case there are no serious problems in the
manuscript tradition or any linguistic difficulties that require a discussion,
and they can thus be left aside. Most commentators are not philologists
and avoid tackling complicated linguistic issues. All too often they do, how­
ever, not think of using the help one can get from the older Church fathers;
after all, the New Testament texts are written in their cultural environment
in their language. Origen, for example, was much better in Greek than we
are, how ever much we look things up in grammars and dictionaries. 12
As a text the passage under study has a particular compositional struc­
ture. In Mark 1:9-11 the baptism is very briefly mentioned and is imme­
diately followed by a vision: Jesus "sees" the heaven opened and the Spirit
descending on him like a dove and a voice is saying, "You are my beloved
son, with you I am well pleased." This structure implies that the kernel of
the story is the vision with the heavenly words. Most readers need this
information—the scholarly exegete, when reading it, realizes that the col­
league knows how to handle narrative structure.
One further aspect of this textual surface is that the statement on the
Son has a meaningful place in the larger composition of the evangelist. The
Son is first mentioned in the headline of the book that in a few traditional
terms informs the reader about the main character of the following pages,
Jesus, the anointed, the Son of God. 1 3 Then there are a few signposts along
the way: via our passage, and the narrative on the transfiguration (9:2-8)
on to the comment of the centurion after Jesus' death (15:39).
A particular way of focusing on the Text is to investigate its history of
tradition or its redaction history. In a study of Mark this means asking
how Mark has treated motifs or textual traditions that he has taken over.
To some commentators this is so important that the question of what
Mark's readers might have learned from the text plays next to no role. In
this kind of approach the Text is analyzed in such a way that its function
within communicative acts between a Sender and his Recipients is largely
neglected. On the other hand, to a commentator who is mainly interested
in the Text as involved in an act of communication the history of tradition
and the redaction history are not as important issues. This is so, even if, in
our case, there are reasons to assume that the wording of the heavenly voice
is influenced by early Christian usage of the Bible (i.e., the graphai, or
scriptures of Israel) in Christological reflection. 14 However, redaction his-
tory can shed some light on certain features of the Situation of the Markan
communication, and so we will return to that topic when we consider the
element of the communication model that was labeled the Situation, in
which and with regard to which Mark's communication took place.
A concentration on the communication between Author/Sender and
Recipients also may mean refraining from trying to look into the head of
the author, in our case of Mark. It is common for the writers of commen-
taries to regard it their principal task to find out the personal theological
tendencies of the biblical author, and to do so through analyzing how, in
our case, Mark has supposedly revised and edited the traditions he takes
over. It can happen that commentators are so interested in the author's
personal bias that they leave aside the present shape of the text, the actual
means of the author's communication with his readers. He is studied as a
theologian of the early church, and what he is actually doing to his addressees
in a given piece of text becomes less interesting. 15
There are other ways to reconstruct a Markan theology, namely by
means of the text as it stands. Indeed, you assume that Mark meant what
he said. Then you systematize certain aspects of the messages that Mark
conveys to his readers in the individual pericopes as understood within the
whole of the gospel. In that way you may, for example, delineate a Markan
view on the person of Jesus or on what Christian ethics could be like. 16
The next element to consider in the model is the Readers/Recipients
of the communication of the biblical author. Their cultural and religious
backgrounds form decisive presuppositions of how they apprehend what
they hear. So a commentator should inform his/her readers of how he/she
imagines these readers. In Marks case, assuming that they are Gentile
Christians is not very original, but seems clearly to be the case. 17 Mark also
seems to presuppose that they have received some Christian education,
and that it is meaningful to quote passages from the Old Testament to
them, indeed to allude to such passages (already in 1:2f.). Such presupposi-
tions are especially significant when the heavenly voice in the baptism text
(1:11) contains an echo of Psalm 2. It might very well be that they could
have caught some of these echoes only after having been instructed in the
Christian community. There were presumably differences within the audi-
ence when it came to how deep their orientation was in terms of the scrip-
tures, theology, etc., but the author assumes some such general knowledge.
This brings us to the factor of the model that was labeled the Situation.
Here the commentator has to give his/her reader some insights into the
world in which the communication took place. In our case this is the Situ-
ation of the Recipients of Mark. There were things that were self-evident
to Mark and to his readers but about which the reader of today knows
little or nothing. Nonetheless they form as it were a sounding-board under
the music played by Mark in his text.
In addition, there is what we could call the specific Situation, that is,
features that belonged to the concrete experience of the Christian addressees
of Mark, such as the shadow cast over their existence by persecutions in the
past and maybe more to come (cp. Mark 13:11-13). Above it was also
mentioned that sometimes redaction critical analyses might give indications
about particular features of the specific Situation of a communication.
Of course it is all the more important that a commentator takes into
account the specific situation of the N T letters to individual communities
with particular problems. It is, for example, of decisive importance to the
one who wants to shed light on what Paul was saying to the Romans in
Rom 6:1-14 that what seems to be a teaching about baptism is primarily
an argument in a situation where Pauls theology of justification is under
attack for leading to immorality. 18
Considering the general Situation, we have seen that the words of the
heavenly voice, "You are my son," are the kernel of Mark 1:9-11. Which
associations would Gentile Christians get from such a designation? Some
commentators find references to Israelite history of religion relevant and
cite myths and rituals belonging to the sphere of divine kingship in the
Ancient Near East. 19 But what do they say about the conditions of the
understanding by Marks readers? More likely it should have meant some­
thing to them that in the Roman empire one also knew to speak of sons of
the gods; there were such sons among gods, heroes, rulers, philosophers,
and miracle workers.
Here a commentator has to make a choice, although maybe she or he
does not always make it consciously. Often the commentators refer to
OT passages to shed light on the Markan passage, 20 or may make an excur­
sion into early Judaism, say to Philo or to the Qumran texts, 21 or into
Hellenistic history of religion. 22 In practice the commentator may follow
the ancient commentary genre, i.e., collect scattered notes to a text which
serve other purposes than the interpretation of Marks message in this text.
Finally, to the Situation that determined the readers' reception of the
textual communication also belongs the way the text was used. As this
colors the reception of the Message, a commentator asking what a passage
told its readers should have an opinion of how the biblical text has func­
tioned among the readers. 23 As to the Gospel of Mark, the present writer
is not alone in his belief that the gospel of Mark functioned in the Chris­
tian community, in education and in readings at the common worship. 24
This means a particular filter for the readers/listeners understanding of the
message of our Markan passage. Readings carried out at an occasion of
worship are open to other semantic dimensions than the merely objective-
descriptive ones. In such a context one encounters Marks citation of the
words of the heavenly voice with particular key signatures. There is more
of chiaroscuro in the scene than, say, in the one where Herod's daughter
says: "Give me the head of John the Baptist on a platter" (Mark 6:25).
Regarding the gospel in this manner has consequences in terms of how
to view its Purpose—to mention a further factor of the communication
model. The purpose then is more to edify than mainly to inform.
Insofar as a commentator should interpret the text, we now, at last, arrive
at the message Mark conveys to his readers. Colleagues who have discussed
what a commentary is have declared that it should elucidate the message
or the meaning of the text for the readers of the commentary. 25 There are,
however, many possible ways of understanding such a statement, depend-
ing on which interpreter says what to whom in which situation with which
purpose. Picking up the somewhat formulaic terms of the interpretation/
communication model, we might differentiate between at least the follow-
ing typical cases. (Message 1 is the Message of Sender 1 to Recipients 1 ; Mes-
sage 2 is the message the Interpreter takes to be the Message of the Text or
of Sender 1 to Recipients 2 ; by "rephrasing interpretation" I mean the sim-
pler, non-deepening interpretation I mentioned when defining "interpre-
tation" above.)
1. The Interpreter/Sender 2 provides Recipients 2 with a rephrasing inter-
pretation of Message 1 to Recipients 1 .
2. The same as 1 above, but presupposing that Message 1 is also the Mes-
sage 2 to Recipients 2 .
3. The same as 1 above but in addition also interpreting Message 1 in a
deeper or more wide embracing way; still, however, the focus is on
Message 1 to Recipients 1 .
4. The same as 3 above, but adding a Message 2 which applies Message 1
to Recipients 2 .
These cases look different in practice, depending on the variables of the
model. Thus, which is the task of the Interpreter (more or less academic?,
more or less pastoral?), which is the Situation of the Interpretation (aca-
demic?, pastoral?), who are its Recipients (scholars?, students?, pastors?,
Bible-reading lay-people?), and which is the Purpose (academic training?,
Bible study?, preaching?). It is important also to note that some of the pos-
sible cases presuppose a particular ideological position, namely that the
interpretation given suggests that it represents God s message to Recipi-
ents 2 . It should also be pointed out that the differentiation above certainly
is more clear-cut than reality. One commentary may in fact represent sev-
eral combinations of the variables. However, the distinctions may possibly
serve as an invitation to reflection, both on the side of the interpreters and
among the users of their commentaries, on the central questions: "What
am I actually doing when commenting," and "What is going on in this
commentary?" 26
In our Markan example obviously the kernel of the message is that the
Jesus whose work the following book is about was God s son equipped
with the Spirit. One may be of the opinion that the commentator should
only hand over this message to the present day reader without any further
explanations; this may be reminiscent of case 1 above, as well as of case 2.
Somebody may add that the designation God s son means that Jesus is act-
ing on behalf of God. This represents a small beginning of what was called
a deepening interpretation and comes a litde nearer to case 3. In the com-
mentaries we thus encounter different degrees of interpretation, from a
simple paraphrase using traditional biblical terms, on to "trans-culturations"
of the message that require some sort of demythologization in order to
make the then-message (Message 1 ) understandable to the reader of today.
So we have mustered some aspects of commentaries, asking how they
appear when regarded as pieces of communication about texts that basi-
cally are themselves acts of communication. The above reflections have had
a limited scope, which is due not least to the fact that hermeneutics has
largely been left aside; this is so either hermeneutics is taken as a philo-
sophical discussion of the usage of and the understanding of textual signs
in general or it is understood as principles of how to interpret and possibly
apply biblical texts in new times. This bracketing of philosophical and
theological hermeneutics may be regarded as a religionswissenschaftliche
attitude rather than a theological one, but even so this narrower perspec-
tive might stimulate our ways of approaching biblical commentaries. Ask-
ing which factors in a textual communication are a commentator s focus
may be clarifying both to writers of commentaries and to their readers, and
actually even invite them to pose hermeneutical questions: in which sense
does a given approach interpret a biblical text—if at all?