Josep Rius-Camps has recently put forward the argument that the Pericope
Adulterae (hereafter PA) was originally composed by Mark and placed in
his gospel after Mark 12:12.3
 This modifies an earlier publication of RiusCamps, where he claimed PA was originally penned by Luke for his gospel.4
 In the more recent article, he states his revised hypothesis as such: The PA originally would have been part of the Gospel of Mark and would have been
situated after the first attack by the High Priests, the scribes and the elders, questioning the authority of Jesus (Mark 11.27-12.12). Luke would have adopted it in his own
work and would likewise have placed it after the first conflict of Jesus with the same
Jewish leaders mentioned in Mark (Luke 20.1-19). Because of the moral strictness that
prevailed at the end of the first century, the PA would have been eradicated together
with the end of the preceding pericope both from the Gospel of Mark and the work
of Luke. For 20 or 30 years, the PA would have been freely transmitted, with the two
primitive archetypes mutually influencing each other and giving rise to more textual
variants than any other document in the NT. Gradually, as the churches collected
together the four canonical gospels, the PA would have been inserted in different
places of the Gospel of John or the Gospel of Luke. Most of the communities that
decided to reinsert it, would have done so in the Gospel of John.5
Rius-Camps' proposal is creative, as it must be; for the difficulty in assessing PAs transmission history is in explaining how PAs language contains
so many non-Johannine elements and yet the manuscript tradition shows
an overwhelming affinity for a Johannine location. In addition, one must
explain PAs famous various locations in the manuscript tradition outside
the traditional and majority location of John 7:53-8:11. I have proposed
an alternative socio-historical context for PAs insertion into gospel tradition elsewhere,6
 but in what follows I would like to focus solely upon the
foundational "building block" of Rius-Camps' proposal—the initial textual location of PA in the fourfold gospel tradition. When a scribe first
decided to place PA in a gospel that would become part of the fourfold
collection, where did he do so? I will demonstrate that the available evidence suggests that a scribe first inserted PA into canonical tradition via a
manuscript of the Gospel of John (hereafter GJohn), and at its traditional
location, John 7:53-8:11.7
 More succinctly, there is no evidence to support he idea that early Christians read PA in canonical tradition in any place
other than John 7:53-8:11 until the late ninth/tenth century CE.
Before proceeding, however, I should note here that my analysis will be
based upon (overlooked) manuscript and patristic evidence of PAs location in gospel tradition, which will be a methodological difference between
Rius-Camps' approach and mine. Rius-Camps relies heavily upon linguistic stylistic similarities between PA and the gospel authors (and stylistic
differences with GJohn).8
 Pace Rius-Camps, and others (some of whom
enlist the linguistic style argument in order to assert Johannine authorship),9
 I am not confident that an analysis of linguistic style is able to
demonstrate a previous textual or authorial source for PA. In an oftneglected article, Cadbury had already argued along these lines in 1917.
While observing the many linguistic similarities between PAs author and
Luke, he refuses to resolve whether those points of contact suggest that
Luke himself wrote PA or someone whose style matched Lukes.10
 He even
notes that if it was someone copying Luke s style, then "style proves to be
a most unreliable criterion."11
 The assumption behind arguments from
style is that a later scribe would not have been able to mimic an earlier
authors style, and therefore that strong similarity suggests the same author.
There is, however, no reason why an astute later scribe could not have copied an earlier style. The most that an argument built upon linguistic style
can assert in a case like PAs is a stronger or weaker affinity between one
authors style and another's.12
 Furthermore, the question of PA's textual
composition (i.e., who wrote down the story) is technically a separate issue from who inserted PA into gospel tradition and where, as one cannot
assume from the outset that the same scribe committed both acts. Thus,
my focus in the following study is not upon PAs original author(s), but
upon the textual location of its insertion and the manuscript locations that
are known for PA.13
 That is, instead of asking "Where could PA have been
located based upon who might have written it?" I will be asking "Where
could PA have been located based upon where early Christians read it?" I
begin with the known manuscript locations for PA.My counting of the manuscripts listed in Text und Textwertthat include PA
in one form or another (including eighteen that include 7:52-8:2 but omit
the rest of the story), yields a total of 1427 manuscripts of inclusion.17
 For
some reason, MS 115 is not included in the witnesses that place PA after
John 8:12, and with this added it gives a total of 1428 manuscripts.18
 One
must take this number as tentative, subject to revision as more evidence
becomes known, and only indicative of the Greek manuscripts. It is, however, heuristically crucial. Fifty-eight manuscripts (again, including 115)
contain PA at an alternative location.19
 This means 95.9% (1370/1428) of
Greek manuscripts that contain PA place it at John 7:53-8:11, an overwhelming majority even when one allows for unknown manuscripts that
may attest other alternative locations. That John 7:53-8:11 is the dominant location within the manuscript tradition, however, only attests PAs
affinity with that location and/or its popularity in the church, not necessarily that it is the original location. For stronger evidence that John 7:53-
8:11 is the original location, one must look at both the manuscripts and
the patristic authors who knew the story of the adulteress. Comments by Ambrose and Jerome reveal that these writers read PA in
GJohn, though they do not reveal exactly where in that narrative the story
appeared. PAs precise location, however, is revealed by contemporaneous Greek and Old Latin manuscripts, Jerome s placement of PA in the Vulgate, and the running commentaries by Augustine. The manuscript evidence will be discussed prior to the patristic authors, and a methodological
note is necessary here. Significant weight is given in this discussion to the
date of manuscripts that include PA. This may seem to ignore the textual
reality that the reading contained in any given manuscript, insofar as it
reflects the exemplar and/or archetype, may be much older than the manuscript itself.20
 In the case of PAs inclusion, however, one is dealing with an
example where a scribe purposefully did not follow his exemplar. Thus, in
this instance, one must focus primarily on the date of the manuscript that
provides sure evidence of PAs inclusion. The exception here is the acceptance of the date of 384 CE for PAs presence in the Vulgate (on which see
below and cf. Jerome, Pehg. 2.17). Jerome completed work on the Gospels for his Vulgate by 384 CE when
he presented them to Pope Damasus.21
 There is widespread agreement
based on the Vulgate manuscript tradition that PA was at John 7:53-8:11
in these manuscripts, but none from this period have survived. Thus,
Codex D (Bezae), which Parker dates to ca. 400 CE,22
 is the earliest certain
manuscript to include PA, and does so at John 7:53-8:11. The remaining
manuscripts that include the pericope can be dated from the seventh century to the fifteenth century, with the vast majority of these manuscripts
dating closer to the twelfth century.23
 Other fifth-century witnesses of PA
at John 7:53-8:11 are in the Old Latin textual tradition, e zndff2
.
24 The Old Latin tradition also provides a witness in the sixth century withy and
two from the seventh century with aur and r1
.
25 There is thus ample textual
evidence that PA was known in the Latin-speaking world at John 7:53-8:11
from the 380 s CE and continued to be associated with that position.
The earliest suggested alternative location for PA in the textual evidence
is its placement at John 7:44 in the Georgian tradition.26
 Toensing claims,
The manuscript evidence for placing the pericope in gospel texts other than after John
7:52 is found beginning in the seventh century. Earliest among this evidence are several Georgian version manuscripts (geo2
) of the seventh century [that] support the
insertion of the pericope after John 7:44.27
Toensing cites the Alands as support for the seventh-century date of geo2
,
who state that geo2
, a revision of geo1
, "was made after the separation from
the Armenian church in the early seventh century."28
 However, contra
Toensing, geo2
 does not actually contain PA, either after John 7:44 or
at 7:53-8:11. The designation "geo2
" refers to the Opiza, Tbet', Dzruc, and
Parhal Georgian manuscripts; "geo1
" refers to the Adysh manuscript.29Blake and Brière collated the Adysh, Opiza, and Tbet' manuscripts in their
The Old Georgian Version of the Gospel of John^ and it is clear in their edition
that PA is not included in these manuscripts of the Georgian GJohn.30
Shanidze collated the Opiza manuscript along with the Dzruc and Partial
manuscripts of geo2
 in his Two Old Recensions of the Georgian GospeL·, and
similarly PA is not included here either.31
 Thus, PA appears nowhere in
geo1
 or geo2
. Presumably, Toensing has confused geo2
 with the later Athonite
Georgian revisions of Saints George and Euthymius. In these documents
text critics prior to and since Toensing have located PAs presence in the
Georgian tradition. Streeter claimed that PA entered the Georgian tradition via "George the Athonite in his revision, c. 1045," and four years after
Streeter, Blake et al. supported this also.32
 More recendy, however, Birdsall
has shown that the earlier revision of Euthymius the Athonite (d. 1028),
Georges predecessor, included PA at John 7:44, as evidenced in Tbilisi
Institutes' MS H 1741.33
 The difficulty surrounding the problem of when
PA was inserted in the Georgian text is clear when one considers that,
according to Birdsall, Euthymius' text appears in parallel in the 1979
critical edition of I. Imnaishvilli,34
 but that it is "established on the basis
of two manuscripts: Tbilisi Institute of MSS A 28... [and] H 1741," the
former of which does not contain PA and the latter of which contains it
after John 7:44.35
 Euthymius and George were both late tenth-century
figures, and thus one must date PAs John 7:44 location in their manuscripts to this period, pace Toensing.
PAs presence at John 7:44 in the Georgian manuscript tradition therefore joins the tenth-century MS 1582 from/1
, which places PA at the end
of GJohn, as a representative for PAs earliest alternative location. One can push PA's location at the end of GJohn to the ninth-century with/ 1
MS 565 if the "faded introduction" to PA stands as a witness to its inclusion.36
 Worth noting, here, however, is that the/ 1
 manuscripts most likely
witness to a scribe's failure to include PA at John 7:53-8:11 (and default
relocation of the story at the end of the gospel); i.e., not a scribe's placement of PA in another gospel context. The scribe of MS 565 claims he
purposefully did not follow his exemplar in inclusion of PA.37
 Thus, it
seems that the tenth-century Georgian manuscripts that include PA at
John 7:44 witness the earliest true alternative location for PA in a gospel
narrative.38
 The main point of the present discussion, however, is that PA
was known at John 7:53-8:11 and maintained relative stability at that location until hundreds of years later, when its multiple alternative locations
began to proliferate by and beyond the tenth century. Before moving forward to why a scribe might have moved PA from John 7:53-8:11, it is
necessary to corroborate the manuscript evidence with fourth- and fifthcentury evidence from Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine. When it comes to knowing precisely in which gospel the Fathers read PA
and where in that gospel they read it, Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine
offer the most helpful statements. Ambrose confirms a Johannine location
while Jerome and Augustine confirm the specific location of John 7:53-8:11.
In a letter dated between 385-387 CE, Ambrose claims that PA is located
in GJohn, and also remarks that the story is, by his time, quite familiar in
Christian communities. He writes, "Numerous times the question [regarding bishops' involvement in secular courts] has been raised, and well known,
too, is the acquittal of the woman who in the Gospel according to Johnwas brought to Christ, accused of adultery."39
 It is clear, then, that Ambrose
knows PA in GJohn,40
 and further evidence makes it probable that Ambrose
read PA at John 7:53-8:11. First, his discussion of PA in, for example,
Epistle 68 (26) follows the order of the Johannine PA precisely. Second, he
may allude to a 7:53-8:11 location when, while discussing PA, he references verses that follow PA immediately in John 8. In Epistle 68 (26),
Ambrose likely cites John 8:15 when he claims that if Jesus had condemned
the adulteress he would have contradicted his purpose of coming to forgive
humanity's sins. He intensifies this point by continuing, "Indeed, furthermore he said, Ί judge no one.' "41
 Although this quotation could be a reference to John 3:17, 5:30, or 7:24, the precise wording (ego non indico
quemquarrì) suggests 8:15, and therefore that Ambrose supports his point
further by citing a statement of Jesus from PAs immediate context. Similarly, in Epistle 64 (74), Ambrose refers to Jesus as the "Sun of Justice" who
pours "forth the full light of His grace [and] says to you:
cGo thy way, and
from now on sin no more.' "42
 If Ambrose read PA at John 7:53-8:11, it is
no coincidence that he attributes the words of 8:11 to a "sunny" and "light"Jesus, since Jesus claims to be "the Light of the World" in John 8:12.43
 One
may need more straightforward evidence before drawing a certain conclusion, but in light of the additional factor that both Jerome and Augustine
clearly read PA at John 7:53-8:11, it is a sound assumption that this was
where Ambrose read it as well.
Jeromes inclusion of PA at John 7:53-8:11 in the Vulgate by 384 CE
slightly antedates Ambroses letters as the earliest piece of evidence for PA
at this location. According to Jerome, already by his time one could find
PA in numerous copies of GJohn. He says, "In the Gospel, according to
John, there is found in many of both the Greek as well as the Latin copies,
the story of the adulteress who was accused before the Lord."44
Augustine twice includes PA in running commentary on GJohn, unambiguously demonstrating that his manuscripts included the story of the
adulteress at John 7:53-8:11. In Tractate 33 of his Tract Eu Jo., he proceeds from discussing Nicodemus' chastisement by the other Pharisees at
the end of John 7 to Jesus' teaching on the Mount of Olives at the opening
of PA, even including the transitional verse of John 7:53 ("And each one
went to his own house").45
 After describing the hostile encounter between
the scribes and the Pharisees and Jesus, Augustine ends this tractate with
Jesus' non-condemnation of the adulteress and some pastoral comments.
Tractate 34 then returns to the gospel text with Augustine's comments upon
John 8:12«
Likewise, in Augustine's Cons., he follows a discussion of John 7 with
PA, which precedes his statements on John 8:12.47
 At Cons. 4.10.16, he
describes John 7:3, and dien begins Cons. 4.10.17 as such:
Again, how weighty are the things which this evangelist reports Jesus to have spoken,
when He came back to the temple from Mount Olivet, and after the forgiveness which
He extended to the adulteress, who had been brought before Him by His tempters, as
one deserving to be stoned
48 
Following a few statements regarding Jesus' acts of writing in PA, Augustine
again demonstrates PA's location of John 7:53-8:11 when he says, "Accordingly, after these incidents, He affirmed Himself to be the light of the
world...," a clear reference to John 8:12.49
 These two texts of Augustine
leave little doubt as to where PA occurred in the copies of GJohn that he
considered authoritative, even though, like Jerome, he was aware of copies
that omitted the story.50
Worth noting in relation to Ambrose, Augustine, and Jerome is the Synopsis Scriptum Sacra, a text that is difficult to date precisely but was attributed dubiously to the fourth-century Athanasius. Whether contemporary
with these other church fathers or slightly later, Pseudo-Athanasius is
another witness to PA at John 7:53-8:11. In his survey of GJohn, he mentions PA just after discussing Nicodemus' argument with the Jewish leadership at the end of John 7 and just before quoting John 8:21b.51
Other early Christian writers offer vague references to PA's location in
their manuscripts. Didymus the Blind reads PA "in certain gospels" (εν
τισιν εύαγγελίοις) in fourth-century Alexandria.52
 In fourth-century
Barcelona, Pacían locates the story in a "gospel" when he challenges the
Novationists.53
 Fifth-century Peter Chrysologus claims the story of the
accused adulteress is "in the Gospel."54
 Sixth-century Cassiodorus claims
that Jesus' statement from John 8:11 is in "the gospel."55
 (Equally ambiguous is Cassiodorus' reference to PA's author as "the evangelist.")56
 Each of
these authors clearly quotes PA as fully-authoritative Scripture, but without more explicit evidence their statements allow no further conjectures as
to PA's home in the manuscripts they read.57
 Importantly, however, and though one may desire more specificity, their statements do not contradict
the argument above that John 7:53-8:11 was PA's earliest manuscript location in the fourfold canon.
Therefore, both the manuscript evidence and patristic evidence confirm
that PA's earliest demonstrable location in GJohn is at John 7:53-8:11. The
Vulgate, Codex D, and the Old Latin tradition offer textual evidence for
this location from the 380's on. Comments from Ambrose, Jerome, and
Augustine corroborate this evidence. At least by the mid-fourth century,
then, PA had been inserted into John 7:53-8:11 and began to be copied in
that location. While manuscript 565 from f1
 suggests that scribes had
placed PA at the end of GJohn in lieu of John 7:53-8:11 by the ninth century, the earliest attested alternative location in a gospel narrative is from
the tenth century, and from this point PA's manuscript location in the
canonical tradition begins to vary considerably. If John 7:53-8:11 is
demonstrably the majority location, and demonstrably the earliest location (and only narrative location in the extant evidence until the tenth
century), how is it that PA came to be lodged from that position? The question of how PA was displaced from John 7:53-8:11 is partly unanswerable in the current study. It is beyond the scope of the present study to
consider how and why scribes placed PA in each of its varying locations in
the gospel manuscripts. Given the late date of the manuscripts, the results
of pursuing such questions would have no immediate impact upon this
study, which is concerned only with PA's initial entrance into canonical
tradition. It is possible, however, to give some account of how and why
scribes placed PA in some of its alternative positions, and thus offer a fuller
picture for the textual history of this passage. Though normally ignored in
PA scholarship, the most likely explanation for many of the alternative
locations is the influence of lectionary reading of the gospels.In order to understand PA's multiple locations and the influence of the
lectionary system, one may begin with recognizing that that PA is not
authentic Johannine material. The story of Jesus and the adulteress initially
confronted early Christians in some context other than GJohn. Papias
likely knows of PA ca. 125 CE, and, depending on how one translates the
Greek, either he or Eusebius attributes it to "the gospel according to the
Hebrews" (το καθ' Εβραίους εύαγγέλιον).58
 Eventually, however, an interpolator inserted PA into GJohn at John 7:53-8:11. This insertion created a
situation where multiple early Christian authors acknowledge both PA's
presence in GJohn and that some manuscripts contain it while others do
not. Though, as shown above, Augustine knows PA at John 7:53-8:11, he
also knows that it is not in every manuscript and resolves this problem by
asserting that weak men have excised the passage.
59
 Likewise, Jerome cites
the story of the adulteress from GJohn, places it at John 7:53-8:11 in his
Vulgate, but also notes that it is found in "many" of the Greek and Latin
manuscripts; thus not all.60
PA's presence in the Philoxenian Syriac manuscript tradition also confirms that the Greek manuscripts from which Syriac translations derived
included PA at John 7:53-8:11 when they included it, but manuscripts of
omission were also known. The Syriac Chronicle attributed to Zacharias
Rhetor (=Zachariah Mitylene), whose final redaction is dated to 569 CE,
contains a statement regarding PA that acknowledges a Johannine location
and possibly manuscripts of omission: "Now there was inserted in the
Gospel of the holy Moro the bishop, in the eighty-ninth canon, a chapter
which is related only by John in his Gospel, and is not found in other
manuscripts "61
 It is not exactly clear from this translation of the SyriacChronicle whether the author means that PA is not found in other gospel
manuscripts or other manuscripts of GJohn. However, the Syriac manuscripts that Gwynn presents resolve this question. Among these manuscripts are texts corresponding to and including the Syriac Chronicle, which
likewise include a prefatory note before PA that attributes its discovery and
translation again to Bishop Mara. Of these, for example, (Gwynn's) MS /
refers to PA as "a chapter which peculiarly belongs to John, and is not
found in all copies."62
 More importantly, however, is another collection of
manuscripts whose introductory comments attribute PA's translation into
Syriac from Greek to "Abbat Paul." In (Gwynn's) MS a, the introduction
reads, "This Syntaxis is not found in all the copies; but the Abbat Mar Paul
found it... and translated it from Greek into Syriac, as it is written here;
from the Gospel of John."63
 (Gwynn's) MS e is even more specific as to the
textual location in its further comment: "It is after the [words], 'Search and
see that prophet out of Galilee ariseth not' (St. Joh. vii. 52), that it is thus
written."64
 MS / s introduction includes the statement that PA follows
John 7:52, but also offers a geographical provenance for the pericope: "A
section that was found in Alexandria (or, in an Alexandrian [copy]), after
the verse 'Search and see [sic] prophet ariseth not.'"65
Therefore, some Syriac texts attribute PA's entrance into their manuscripts to Abbat Paul while others attribute it to Bishop Moro/Mara. All
agree, however, that a reader could find the story in GJohn but that not all
copies of GJohn include it. The only specific location ever given for the
pericope is John 7:53-8:11. Combined with the comments from the Western Fathers, this evidence confirms further that the single explicit manuscript location for PA in the narrative of GJohn until the tenth century is
John 7:53-8:11. Beyond this, the evidence demonstrates that, in the fourth,
fifth, and sixth centuries, it was common knowledge for many Christian
authors and leaders that some copies of GJohn contained PA while others
did not.
3.2 Scribal Confusion
In the process of copying texts, then, Christian scribes were left in a quagmire: Some exemplars contained PA and some did not. Scribes attest this
conundrum by several methods, chiefly by using text-critical markers to
note their suspicion. Numerous scholars suggest that the diacritical umlaut
between John 7 and John 8 in Codex Β implies that the scribe knows PA
at this location, but does not copy it either because his exemplar does not
contain it or he regards it as inauthentic.66
 Summarizing other manuscript
evidence, Parker says,
A few copies of the Byzantine text use symbols taken from Alexandrian scholarship to
indicate that a passage is probably an interpolation. Some of these manuscripts place
the first marker not at verse 53 but at 8.2 or 8.3, showing that they regarded the first
couple of verses as genuine. Many of these also contain a note indicating that not all
copies have the passage.
67
In a similar vein, Metzger states, "Significantly enough, in many of the
witnesses that contain the passage it is marked with asterisks or obeli, indicating that, though the scribes included the account, they were aware that
it lacked satisfactory credentials."68
 As already mentioned, the scribe of MS565 noted that he purposefully did not include the pericope though his
exemplar did,69
 and instead he likely placed the story at the end of GJohn
by default.
Given that scribes were unsure or sceptical of PA's canonical status and
its presence in John 7:53-8:11, it is easy to imagine that they would then
take the further step of exercising some scribal freedom and placing it in a
location deemed more suitable for the passage. Indeed, this is the argument of Ross, who acknowledges scribal confusion regarding PA and further claims that the passage was "later restored by copyists who knew it to
be genuine but did not know what was its proper location."70
Ross gives only brief consideration to PA and its textual history (about
half a page), as he discusses it alongside five other NT examples of "floating words," that is, "longer passages thought to be additions to the text
[that] appear in different places in different manuscripts."71
 The connotation of "floating" is that PA is somehow wandering aimlessly through
the textual tradition without a proper anchor or guide,72
 and some discussions of PAs many manuscript locations reflect this sentiment. Wallace says,
"Early scribes, in sensing the richness and authenticity of the pericope adulterae, groped for an appropriate place to put it."73
 In this theory, Christian
scribes were utterly convinced of PAs authenticity and searched confusedly—
"groped"—for an appropriate location within the gospel manuscripts to
place it, thus producing the array of locations. Likewise, Morris claims, "It
seems clear enough that those scribes who felt it too important to be lost
were not at all sure where to attach it."74
 While not mentioning scribalconfusion, McLachlan still attributes PAs manuscript locations in Lukan
and Johannine gospel tradition to "the state of the text in the second century and its free handling by scribes!'75
Van Lopik criticizes Ross heavily for describing PA as a "floating" tradition based upon its variety of manuscript locations in a response to Ross'
article:
As far as floating single words or short phrases are concerned, textual critics will generally subscribe to this conclusion. But so far as it concerns longer passages, Rosss conclusion seems debatable In this note I do not intend to enter into the question of
whether the six floating passages discussed by Ross are authentic or spurious. My only
aim is to demonstrate that two of the passages discussed by Ross [Luke 22.43-44 and
PA] are floating because they were used in the liturgy.76
According to van Lopik, the more plausible explanation for PA's occurrence in alternative locations is the influence of liturgical readings of the
gospels on continuous-text manuscripts.77
 Van Lopik is not alone in noting this liturgical influence, however, and this crucial issue deserves more
attention in studies of PA's textual history. The present study thus now
turns to consider the impact of lectionary reading on PA's textual history.
3.3 Lectionary Influence
The general influence of the lectionary system on non-lectionary texts is
and has been well recognized.78
 Sometimes when scribes produced new continuous-text manuscripts from a continuous-text exemplar that had been
marked in lections, the new manuscript reflected the lectionary practice
(although not technically a lectionary text). Van Lopik specifically contends that this is the cause of PA's relocation in MSS 225, 115, and/13
. In
the case of MS 225 (twelfth century),79
 which places PA after John 7:36,
van Lopik claims the solution is much simpler than Ross' and Wallaces
proposal that the scribe knew PA to be genuine but did not know where to
put it. After observing that "minuscule 225 is a lectionary containing a fidi,
continuous Gospel text, not a selection of lessons," van Lopik claims that
PA was dislodged from its normal location of John 7:53-8:11 and placed
after John 7:36 because "John 7.37-52, 8.12 is the lesson for Pentecost/'80
Thus, "Miniscule 225 excises the PA from the lesson of Pentecost. But it
inserts the PA after 7.31-6, another passage passed over in the series of lessons in the movable liturgical calendar."81
Concerning MS 115 (tenth or twelfth century),82
 van Lopik states, "In
the case of 115 there is no reason to speak of PA 'floating' at all."83
 MS
115 s scribe proceeds from John 7:52 to 8:12, then writes PA, then 8:12
again.84
 Van Lopik surmises:
I think that what happened can be described as follows. The scribe wrote out 8.12
twice: after 7.52 as the end of the lesson of Pentecost and before 8.13 as the beginning
of the lesson of the Thursday of the fourth johannine' week. A similar repetition of a
passage for liturgical reason is found in the numerous manuscripts which, in the lesson
from Luke 8... repeat Luke 8.8b after 8.15. Further examples are of course to be
found in 225, which offers the whole pericope John 13.3-17 twice, and in the manuscripts which give Luke 22.43-4 in two different places.85 
(It is important for the present study to note that, though MS 115 is
witness to an alternative location, it technically has not moved PA from
John 7:53-8:11 but rather inserted 8:12 prior to PA. That is, PAs affinity
with John 7:53-8:11 is manifest even in this liturgically-influenced text.)
Thus, van Lopik accounts for the mysterious occurrences of PA after John
8:12 in MS 115 and after John 7:36 in MS 225 as manifestations of a
larger liturgical influence on gospel texts that he observes in numerous
locations. He similarly accounts for PAs presence after Luke 21:38 in/13
.
In/ 1 3
 (none earlier than eleventh century), PA occurs after Luke 21:38,
beginning with the connective John 7:53 stating that "each one went to his
own home," which provides a much more awkward narrative disruption in
this location than the supposed disruption when PA follows John 7:52.86
The manuscripts in this family that contain PA after Luke 21:38 are perhaps the most obvious example of lectionary impact.87
 Contra Wallace,
who attributes PAs relocation after Luke 21:38 to the parallel portrayals of
Jesus' teaching in the temple, van Lopik aligns himself with Metzger and
Wikgren,
w ho have pointed out that the location of the PA in fam 13 is a blatant example of the
influence of the Byzantine lectionary system on the text of the Ne w Testament. Luke
21.12-19 is to be read on 7 October, the feast of Saints Sergios and Bakchos; the day
after, on 8 October, the PA is to be read on the feast of Saint Pelagia.88
Van Lopiks rhetoric perhaps presents an unnecessary false choice, since it
is thoroughly plausible that the lectionary system recognized the narrative resonances between Luke 21:37-38 and John 8:1-2. Indeed, it is hard to
think that the parallels were completely unrelated—beyond the "teaching"
and "temple" similarities, one must also notice the presence of the Mount
of Olives and "all the people"(πας ό λαός) in each text (Luke 21:37-38;
John 8:1-2). Nevertheless, it is clear that PA, when it is to be found in the
menologion, is normally read on October 8, St. Pelagias day.89
 Beyond
this, and though (surprisingly) van Lopik does not cite him, it was Colwell
who first posited that PAs presence in f15
 was due to liturgical reading.
He says,
It is my opinion also that the location of the story of the adulteress at the end of Luke 21
in fam 13 is due to lectionary influence. For in the lectionaries this passage is omitted
from John (as it is in fam 13) and appears most frequendy on October 8th; while the
gospel lection for October 7th is Luke 21:12-19. Is it mere coincidence that this pericope appears in fam 13 at the first suitable point after Luke 21:19? Is it not probable
that its location at the end of Luke 21 in this family is due to its appearance in this
position in the menologion of the gospel lectionary?90
The solution that van Lopik and Colwell offer is a much more plausible
explanation for how PA was relocated to its alternative locations in MSS 225,
115, and/13
 than is the solution of, for example, Ross, who sees the guiding force behind PAs alternative locations as scribes who were convinced
of PAs authenticity but unsure of a proper location. PAs presence in these
locations was therefore not due to confusion but to a deliberate scribal
choice.
Therefore, though the manuscripts under consideration are continuoustext manuscripts, as Wikgren notes, "The lectionaries often and quite clearly
influenced the text of non-lectionary MSS," and PA is one example of this
phenomenon.91
 Beyond the manuscripts discussed immediately above, it
is also possible that this is the cause of the relocation of PA to John 7:44 in
the Georgian manuscripts. Birdsall claims that work in the Georgian lectionaries "has scarcely begun," but observes that the removal of Mark 14:33-
37a and its relocation to the end of GJohn is due to lectionary influence.92He does not mention PA in this regard, but Birdsalls observations do raise
that possibility. However, it is not necessary here to account for every alternative location.93
 It is clear that several of the alternative manuscript locations
for PA are due to lectionary influence. While this offers some text-critical
perspective for how PA was removed from its original location, none of
these manuscripts can be dated as early as PAs presence in GJohn at 7:53-
8:11, as attested by Codex D, Old Latin manuscripts, Jerome, and Augustine,
and indeed they are many centuries removed. Thus, one cannot maintain
the notion that early Christian scribes had, on the one hand, a loose tradition about Jesus and the adulteress that they considered authentic and
worthy of a gospel location, and, on the other hand, various possible locations to place this rogue tradition. A more probable explanation of the
available evidence is that an early Christian scribe or scribal school inserted
PA at John 7:53-8:11, where it was copied, re-copied, sometimes omitted,
and sometimes omitted but still referenced, for centuries until liturgical
readings began to influence non-liturgical texts, at which point PA was, at
times, relocated to alternative locations. This liturgical act was made easier
since many of the extant manuscripts of GJohn omitted PA entirely. Taken together, then, the facts that John 7:53-8:11 is (1) the majority and
(2) earliest known location for PA and (3) that all of the alternative locations are late and some are certainly due to liturgical influence, suggest
that John 7:53-8:11 was intended, by its interpolator, as a proper narrative
location for PA within the authoritative Jesus tradition in a manner that
PAs numerous alternative locations were not.94
 There is no extant evidence
that PA was read in a canonical gospel text in any location other than
John 7:53-8:11 until the late ninth/tenth century CE. Thus, contra RiusCamps and despite PAs linguistic similarities to other gospel texts, the
evidence suggests that when PA first entered into canonical tradition, it
did so in what has become its traditional location.