The enigmatic contrasts about law in Pauls letter to the Romans are well
known. This paper attempts to elucidate one of those, namely how Paul
can say that believers are discharged from the law (7:6) and yet be concerned that they fulfill it (13:10). That will involve a survey of what Paul
communicates about law in Romans, beginning with elementary observations both of how the term for law, νόμος, is used and of some of Paul's
appeals to writings that can also be signified by the term "law." It will lead
to a discussion of several difficult passages in the letter before finally
addressing Pauls appeals to the Law in chapters 13 and 14.
I accept for this inquiry the perspective that sees Romans as Paul's
attempt to garner an expression of solidarity between himself and believers
in Rome for his mission to Spain (15:23-29).l
 Paul knows that he has been slandered in some circles (3:7-8; 15:30-32). He aims to explain himself
clearly, not only to obtain some measure of support, but eventually to
benefit believers in Rome. Since he advances a message that appears to
minimize aspects of the Law, he needs to show how he does not promote
behavioral excesses amongst his gentile converts.2
 Connected to this is the
advocacy of harmony or solidarity between all who believe.
In Romans Paul primarily displays two overlapping concepts of law:
that which offers written, controlling or authoritative regulations (sometimes referring to a body of laws and sometimes to an individual law) and
that which offers written, authoritative instruction.3
 The former establishes
grounds of accountability for Israel's covenant with God. The latter
informs, both disclosing God's plans and purposes and portraying Godpleasing behavior. Both concepts of law are rooted in the words of the
Torah, a segment of the scriptures. In Romans Paul tends to keep his use
of the term νόμος separate from his quotations of words from the Torah.4
A more precise definition of νόμος beyond signifying "Torah" or "Mosaic
Law" brings more .clarity to a discussion of the letter's issues.5
 That is especially true for those difficult passages in which Paul seems to appeal to a
concept of law as a general controlling authoritative standard,6
 a concept to which many object in view of Pauls consistent rootedness to the Torah
throughout the letter.7
The sense of law as written, authoritative regulation is conveyed through
most of the 74 uses of the term νόμος found in Romans,8
 and also both
with the term γράμμα,9
 translated by the NRSV as "written code"10
 in
2:27and 7:6, and the term εντολή, which clusters in chapter 7 (7:8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13) and reappears in 13:9. While the second sense of law as written, authoritative instruction clearly is implied in some uses of νόμος, it
appears most directly in Romans' twenty-three quotations from the Torah,
the Law.11
 Instead of being tied to the term νόμος, it is connected to the
term γραφή,12
 scripture, and its verbal counterparts γέγραπται,13
 "it is written," and two other tense variations of γράφω ("it was written"—4:23 and
"Moses writes"—10:5, both introducing Torah quotes). Of Romans'
twenty-four unequivocal appeals to scripture connected to the γραφ- root,
seven refer directly to the Torah.14
 That high view of Law as scripture is intotal harmony both with Pauls Jewishness and his sense of what he claims
God has done new for the world in the gospel. It helps to free him from
the charge of promoting illicit behavioral patterns. Though Paul also
advances the notion that to some degree, the Torah's authoritative regulations are surpassed by what God has done in the events of the gospel,
Torah as scripture always maintains its authority for Paul.
Distinguishing between law as regulation and Law as instructing scripture
is not a novel approach.15
 Neither is defining a specific meaning for the term
νόμος as it is used in passages in Romans.16
 Starting with the distinction
between law as authoritative regulation and Law as instructing scripture, I
would like to probe its implications for Pauls regard for law throughout
Romans. That would include interacting with passages where the meaning
of νόμος does not fall neady into those two definitions. I hope to demonstrate how Paul shows a basically consistent application of the distinction in
Romans, but how that distinction may also provide a glimpse into how he
perceives that regulations of the Law can be read as scripture in normative
ways. Paul applies that approach informally in chapter 14 in discussing the
dissension between the strong and the weak in faith.
In his unusual epistolary greeting, Paul states that he promotes amongst
gentiles an obedience "of faith," υπακοή πίστεως. What is "the obedience
of faith?''17
 That is Paul's well-nuanced, introductory point.18
 Consider 
how the thought would be different if Paul stated that he promoted
υπακοή νόμου.19
 Paul appears to be declaring in one opening shot that
his commission from Christ does not result in an uncontrolled way of
living, but rather involves a form of obedience consistent with God and
his activities. It is an obedience that flows naturally out of the good news to
which Paul has been commissioned. That news concerning the descendent
of David, Jesus, whose resurrection declares his sonship of God, has been
anticipated in the scriptures, says Paul (1:2). As part ofthat news, gentiles are included in the role of obeying God. Paul indicates that that
obedience flows from faith.20
 What role does law play in delineating that
obedience? The term νόμος occurs 74 times in Romans. Most of those uses—perhaps
as many as 6321—do fit clearly within the notion of the Torah, the Mosaic
Law, as containing written, authoritative regulations. Consider the following as cross-sectional examples:
2:12, the first use of νόμος—"... all who have sinned under the law [as a body of written, authoritative regulations] will be judged by the law [as a body of written, authoritative regulations]."
3:20—"For 'no human being will be justified in his sight* by deeds prescribed by the
law[s body of written, authoritative regulations]."
4:14-15—"If it is the adherents of the law[s body of written, authoritative regulations] who are to be the heirs, faith is null and the promise is void. For the law [with
its written, authoritative regulations] brings wrath, but where there is no law [written,
authoritative regulation] neither is there violation."22 5:13—"sin was indeed in the world before the [body of authoritative written regulations of the] law, but sin is not reckoned when there is no law [authoritative written
regulation]."
7:1—"For do you not know, brothers and sisters—for I am speaking to those who
know the law[ s body of written, authoritative regulations]—that the law[ s body of
written, authoritative regulations are] is binding on a person only during that persons
lifetime?"23
8:3-4—"For God has done what the law[ s body of written, authoritative regulations],
weakened by the flesh, could not do: by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and to deal with sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, so that the just requirement
of the law[s body of written, authoritative regulations] might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit."
10:4—"For Christ is the end [goal?] of the law[ s body of written, authoritative regulations] so that there may be righteousness for everyone who believes."
Associating the expressions "body of written, authoritative regulation" or
"written, authoritative regulation" with most of the uses of the word "law"
would offer similar clarity. Though those regulations are written as part of
scripture, Paul for the most part tends to keep his actual uses of the term
νόμος as regulation separate from his references to scripture. There are
places where the two senses obviously overlap. For example, when in 2:18
Paul addresses Jews who claim to know God's will because they "are
instructed in the law," he is clearly referring to regulations that are part of
the scriptures that instruct. The same thought emerges two verses later
when he addresses the law as "the embodiment of knowledge and truth"
(2:20). But in the immediate context of both statements he is dealing quite
specifically with violations of regulations: theft, adultery, idolatry. Likewise, in 3:19 and 3:20 there is a similar running together of meaning when
Paul writes, "Now we know that whatever the law says..." and "through
the law comes the knowledge of sin" where again he is drawing on the
informing quality of the Law while addressing its covenantal regulations,24
referring to people being under the law" (έν τφ νόμφ) and to "deeds prescribed by law" (έξ έργων νόμου). Only in one place, 3:21, does Paul unequivocally use the word νόμος as part of the standard hendiadys for
scripture: "But now, apart from law [the body of written, authoritative regulations], the righteousness of God has been disclosed, and is attested
by the law and the prophets " And though elsewhere, Paul refers to what
"the law had... said" (ό νόμος ελεγεν, 7:7), quoting the command against
coveting, he does so focusing on the regulation itself, not on its authority
from being in the scriptures.
When Paul quotes from the part of the scriptures known as the Law, he
identifies what he quotes as scripture, not as law. He uses the formula "it
is written" (4:17, 23; 11:18; 12:19), though twice he writes "scripture
says" (4:3, 9:17) and once, "Moses writes" (10:5). Eleven times he quotes
from the Torah with no introductory formula, and in three other cases
uses variants: "word of promise" (9:9), "Moses says" (10:19), "it/he says"
(15:10). In only three of the twenty-three citations from the Torah does
Paul ever quote specific commands or regulations: Romans 7:7, noted
above, and Romans 13:9 (with two sets of laws), which will be examined
later. The word νόμος also appears in those contexts, though only in 7:7
might one be able to make a case that it be correlated with γραφή since it
is used the same way as γραφή in 4:3 and 9:17. With these three exceptions noted (7:7 and twice inl3:9), the rest of Pauls citations from the
Torah come from narrative or didactic settings, not from regulations.
Pauls usage does tend to distinguish νόμος as regulation from Law as
informing scripture. Not every usage fits the concrete, distinct definition of law as regulation.
In at least nine different statements (2:14, 3:27 (2x), 7:21, 7:23 (2x), 7:25
and 8:2 (2x)), appearing at significant moments in three different passages,
Paul appears to broaden his use of the term νόμος. In each of those passages, Paul's use of νόμος creates ambiguity that helps to advance his overall
message by calling into question certain ideological assumptions. Paul then
follows the ambiguity with clarifying explanations that help to advance his
central points. Those three passages, along with a fourth, will be explored
in a bit more detail to discuss ideology behind Paul s rhetoric with relation
to νόμος as regulation.
(a) 2:14
One of those uses, 2:14, follows the above quoted statement in 2:12,
where Paul refers to people sinning under the law as a body of regulations 
Law in Romans: Regulation and Instruction 259
being judged by that body of regulations. Pauls comments are puzzling
when he says:
When Gentiles, who do not possess the law [the body of written, authoritative regulations] do instinctively what the law [the body of written, authoritative regulations]
requires, these, though not having the law [the body of written, authoritative regulations] are a law [νόμος] to themselves (2:14).
This last use of "law" appears to refer to something other than the body
of written, authoritative regulations found in the Torah, even though it
does point to some sort of controlling authority.25
 This is the first of
Romans' thought-provoking ambiguities with the use of the word νόμος.
The statement that follows in 2:15 does help clarify the expression "they
are a law to themselves" by referring to "what the law requires" (το έργον
του νόμου, the work of the written body of regulations) as being "written
on their hearts." What is the work of the law written on gentiles' hearts?
That appears to reflect the words of the "New Covenant" in Jer 38:33
(LXX, MT 31:33) about νόμος being written on the heart by God.26
Quite possibly, we have here a reference to gentile converts living under
the New Covenant, a point that appears to be reiterated in 2:26-29 in
reference to uncircumcised gentiles who keep the δικαιώματα of the
"law," the "written requirements" of the body of authoritative regulations. When the uncircumcised keep the basic standards of the written
regulations, what the use of νόμος in 2:27 appears also to reference, they
reflect the same circumcised heart that Israel under its covenant is also to
display, as the echoes to Deut 30:6 in Rom 2:29 would indicate.27
 The
"law to themselves" of 2:14 would appear to refer to controlling factors
that are in line with the Torah's regulations, but not precisely the Torah's
regulations.
This statement in 2:14 appears to set up Paul's discussion of gentile
inclusion in the work of Christ later on in the letter.28
 Those gentiles who do the Law's δικαιώματα without themselves being subject to its written
regulations would be amongst those eventually described as under the
influence of God's Spirit.29
 That would coordinate with Paul establishing
the notion of God's impartiality as judge (2:16), building to the equal
participation of Jew and Greek beneath the power of sin (3:9) as a foundation to his case in chapter 7 that the Law's body of authoritative regulations do not keep people from succumbing to sin's power.
30 The next two unusual, often discussed uses of νόμος appear twice in 3:27.
There Paul contrasts a law "of works" with a "law of faith," introduced by
speculation of what sort of "law" excludes boasting. In asking "what sort of
law," Paul is clearly querying about what can be found in the body of written, authoritative regulations. The law "of works" certainly connects to
those written, controlling regulations, as indicated by the statement that
follows in 3:28 that one is "justified by faith apart from works prescribed
by the law." However, it is difficult to see any specific regulation in view in
the "law of faith." Paul might be appealing to a sense of νόμος as a general
controlling authority, a disputable point.31
 He may instead be setting the
stage rhetorically for his presentation of what the Law as scripture points
out about righteousness coming from faith in the story of Abraham.32
Through an ambiguous use of the word for "law" in 3:27, he prepares his
readers to consider that the scriptures in the Torah portray much more
than regulations. The regulations, and an emphasis on performing them,
can be exclusionary (3:29). To root righteousness in the obedience of
Torah's regulations, all of which express the covenantal obligations to
which the people of Israel have committed themselves,33
 would be to make
God the god of Jews only, and not of gentiles (3:29-30). The life of Abraham as portrayed in Genesis shows that God can justify both the uncircumcised and the circumcised, but does so based on their faith, not on
their adherence to any regulation.
Quoting from the Torah, Paul reminds his readers of what "scripture
says" (4:3) about Abraham, portraying him as the recipient of an agreement in which he was to be "the father of many nations" (4:16, quoting
Gen 17:5). Thus when in 3:27, Paul refers to a 'Taw of faith" that excludes
boasting, and in 3:31 he claims that faith for both Jew and gentile upholds
the law, he is setting up his explanation of how the body of written regulations that is being upheld and not overthrown (3:31) is itself part of a
broader restoring program involving all people, not just Jews. Paul implies
that God s plan to establish righteousness in the world begins, not with the
regulations of Sinai but the promise to Abraham. The "law of faith" precedes the law "of works." The law "of works" is controlled by the "law of
faith." Abraham, after all, was considered righteous by believing the promise in Genesis 15, not by the act of circumcision in Genesis 17. He received
circumcision as a "sign," (the term in Gen 17:11 and Rom 4:11) to seal the
righteousness obtained by his earlier faith as an uncircumcised man (4:11,
referring also to the "righteousness" of Gen 15:6). As Paul recounts, Abraham showed his strong faith (4:20) that he would become "the father of
many nations" (Gen 17:5) after having already been regarded righteous by
his faith (Gen 15:6) that his descendente would be as numberless as the
stars (Gen 15:5).34
Throughout chapter 4, Paul quotes from the Torah as scripture (4:3) to
establish that point. He ends his argument saying, "Now the words, 'it was
reckoned to him,' were written not for his sake alone, but for ours also. It
will be reckoned to us who believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from
the dead, who was handed over to death for our trespasses and was raised
for our justification" (4:23-25). The scriptures, of which the Law is a part,
are meant to instruct Paul and his audience, who both believe in Christ.
Just as he has shown in chapters 1-3 that both Jew and Greek face the impartiality of God s wrath, he now has shown how both Jew and Greek
benefit by having the same kind of faith as Abraham, the father of the
people to whom the written, authoritative regulations were eventually
given. The expression "law of faith" is a thought-provoking ambiguous
statement that leads to Pauls portrayal of what establishes a foundation for
the written body of regulations. It does not point to any specific regulation
itself. Neither does it signal a shift in the definition of the term νόμος in
3:27 from regulation to a segment of the scriptures, the Torah. Five different statements, clustered toward the end of chapter 7 and the
beginning of chapter 8, do use the term νόμος in a way that seems to alternate between a sense of written regulation, and a sense of some other overriding, controlling entity. In 7:21 Paul states, "So, I find it to be a law that
when I want to do what is good, evil lies close at hand." Paul does not
indicate a specific written regulation with his reference to "law" in 7:21.
No regulation says what Paul says in 7:21. In 7:22-23 he attributes that
circumstance of 7:21 to a έτερος νόμος when he says "For I delight in the
law of God [the body of written, authoritative regulations] in my inmost
self, but I see in my members another law at war with the law of my mind,
making me captive to the law of sin that dwells in my members." Is that
"other law" another principle outside of the written regulations?36
 Is it the
written regulations as applied in the sphere of sin (7:23), to be contrasted
with how the law works in the sphere of the mind?37
 Are the expressions
the "other law," the "law of my mind" and "the law of sin" all metaphors?38
The uses of νόμος in 7:21 and 7:23 are jarringly ambiguous.
Paul appears to shift the goalposts, not to obscure, but to reinforce
a point he has been making earlier in chapters 5 and 6, that the world
is dominated by a significant overriding power, sin, which cannot be overcome by any sort of regulation, written or otherwise, that seeks to
hinder the urges of the flesh. That is because sin working in the flesh can
overcome any form of mental willpower. Thus sin imposes another form
of regulatory control, a έτερος νόμος, probably also equivalent to "the
law of sin" (7:23, 25, 8:2) that governs the flesh and stands in the way of
the holy, righteous and good law of God (7:8), a reference to the body of
regulations.39
Here it may be helpful to recognize that Romans is filled with the
language of political discourse.40
 Terms such as "righteousness" or
"justification" [both δικαιοσύνη] and "law" [νόμος], along with a variety
of related terms (just, justice, justify, right, righteous, unrighteous, unrighteousness, injustice, obey, obedience, disobedience, good, bad, evil, lawless,
sin, transgression, trespass) that abound in Romans are at home in the
world of Greco-Roman politics. The context of the section under discussion is sprinkled with other significant terminology such as βασιλεύω
(5:14,17,21; 6:12) and κυριεύω (6:9,14; 7:1). Paul appears to be discussing the entity that actually rules the world apart from Christ.41
 It is sin, he
claims. He has shown in chapters 1-3 that all, whether Jew or gentile, are
under sins power (3:9). Sin shows no partiality. Belonging to the people of
Israel is not a way to overcome such power. In chapter 7 he points out that
sin is so powerful that it can take words that themselves are holy, righteous
and good, the regulating words of the Law itself, and make people sin even
more.
Paul demonstrates the point in a way that reaches even beyond the
words of the Torah's regulations, to engage the wider moral philosophical
world of Greco-Roman thought.42
 His chief illustration comes from the
tenth commandment, "you shall not covet." The rendering of that command in Greek enables Paul to play both sides of the Jew-gentile fence,
enhancing the atmosphere of gentile inclusion that persists throughout the
letter. The words in Greek, ουκ επιθυμήσεις, also evoke one of the chief vices of the Greco-Roman world—passion, επιθυμία.43
 This is not to say
that the written regulations of Torah are suddenly not being referred to
with some of his uses of νόμος here. It is merely to point out that what Paul
says here has immediate relevance for those who know Torah's written
regulations (7:1), while serving as an example for those who understand
the rhetoric of the inner conflicts of the mind.44
 Jew and Greek are equally
susceptible to the controlling passions of the flesh under the power of sin.
Whether appealing to the specific regulations of Torah, the source of Paul's
illustration, or to any device designed to promote control and order, even
self-control the supposed antidote to passion, one is helpless in the face of
the power of sin.
The issue that Paul has been developing in earnest since chapter 5:12 is
that there has been a change of citizenship for those who believe in Jesus.
Believers belong to a different order, one headed by Christ to whom they
belong by virtue of his death and resurrection. In that order, grace rules. In
that order, righteousness is in charge. In that order, the Spirit of God enlivens its citizens to overcome sin and death.
The law, as a body of authoritative regulations, belongs to the old order.
It is ineffective in enabling people to overcome the power of sin. Since
people in that order naturally succumb to the power of sin, thus violating
specific regulations in the Law, people receive two chief outcomes from the
regulations ofthat Law: knowledge of sin (3:20, 7:13), and condemnation
(7:9-11; 14-24). The first outcome emerges from an awareness of Law as
instructing scripture. The regulations do also inform, a point important to
recognize for the discussion of 13:8-10.
By contrast, the death and resurrection of Jesus, claims Paul, have set
believers free from the power of sin. Those who believe in Jesus have been
baptized into his death (6:2-7). They are free now to live in newness of life
They are not under law as a regulating authority, but under grace,
the product of Gods active interventions on their behalf (6:14).45
 Those
who see themselves as under the Laws body of regulations should recognize that they have actually died to them (7:1-6). They are discharged from
the governing code of the Laws body of written regulation (7:6), its
γράμμα, free now to live in the new life of the Spirit (7:6).
Paul may be referring to regulations when he speaks of the νόμος of the
Spirit in 8:2, but I find that a less likely possibility in view of the point that
he has just made that no regulation works to overcome the conflict of the
mind. Such triumph comes only through Christ (7:25). Pauls point is that
sin causes the regulations to divide the person. Saying that the regulations
as ministered or superintended by the Spirit are what Paul is referring to is
dissatisfying. Defenders ofthat point declare that Torah is in view, but do
not identify how the Spirit uses regulations from the Torah to help overcome the influences of sin and death.46
 The phrase "the law of the Spirit of
life in Christ Jesus" seems to be a rhetorically effective way for Paul to set
the stage for his discussion of the Spirit. The phrase uses νόμος ambiguously, yet with a scripture-based connection, not specifically to the regulations of Torah, but to the "new life of the Spirit" (7:6), i.e. the New
Covenant to which he has already alluded in his use of νόμος in 2:14-15.
Though it may be unusual for a Jewish writer to portray the law referred to
in Jeremiah 31 as different from the written regulations of the Torah,47
Paul sidesteps such a difficulty by appealing ultimately, not to Torah's body
of regulations, but its δικαίωμα, its "righteous requirement"48
 being
"fulfilled" because of what has happened to those who have come to be "in
Christ Jesus." The "law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus" sounds like a
new kind of law that promotes the standards of Torah's regulations, but in
a successful way.
Paul's point is that in the death and resurrection of Jesus, God has done
what the Law's body of written regulations could not do. He has passed
sentence on that which has hindered his people's escaping the condemnation of law-violation, the power of sin itself. Not the specific regulations of 
the Law, but the core of right living promoted by its regulations is enacted
by those who live by God's Spirit instead of by sin-dominated flesh (8:1-4).
This will be important to recognize when addressing Paul's conclusions in
13:8-10.
(d) 9:30-10:4
Before addressing 13:8-10 it is important to see how Paul finalizes his
point about the inadequacy of the written regulations at the end of chapter 9
and the beginning of chapter 10. This does not involve any controversial
understanding of the term νόμος, but it does make some provocative points
about the regulations of the Law, recalling statements Paul had made earlier in the letter. In 9:30 he picks up the thread that he had introduced in
1:16-17, how the "gospel" reveals "the righteousness of God." It is a thread
he had continued in 3:21 when he said that "the righteousness of God" has
been disclosed "apart from law." He goes on to explain in 3:21-23 how
God's putting forward of Jesus as a "sacrifice of atonement" offers a fresh
disclosure of that righteousness. That is the point to which he returns at
the end of chapter 9 in explaining the rejection of his Jewish contemporaries of the acts of Jesus:
What then are we to say? Gentiles, who did not strive for righteousness, have attained
it, that is, righteousness through faith; but Israel, who did strive for the righteousness
that is based on the law, did not succeed in fulfilling that law. Why not? Because they
did not strive for it on the basis of faith, but as if it were based on works. They have
stumbled over the stumbling stone, as it is written, "See, I am laying in Zion a stone
that will make people stumble, a rock that will make them fall, and whoever believes
in him will not be put to shame" (9:30-33).
If, in Paul's thought, God's righteousness has most recently been expressed
through the death and resurrection of Jesus, then any rejection of the
crucified resurrected one would be tantamount to a rejection of God's
righteousness, resulting in a reinvention of what God's righteousness is. To
deny that God has worked in Jesus would be to base righteousness solely
on covenantal obligations portrayed in the Law's body of regulations.49
That is the contextual setting for Paul's comments in 10:1-4, where he claims that Jews who seek to establish their righteousness based on adherence to Torah's regulations are not in submission to God's righteousness in
Christ. Paul here does not make the point that the Torah's individual laws
are problematic in themselves, but that they have been outmoded by what
God has done in Christ, who is proclaimed as "the end of the law for those
who believe." Dependence on righteousness as stemming only from keeping regulations (10:5), then, would place one under an obligation that is
apart from Christ, linked to an out-of-date system that elsewhere Paul has
portrayed as exclusionary (3:29) and ineffectual (chapters 2 and 7). In this
context, it is ultimately out of touch with what God has done in Christ,
who has inaugurated a new order that has brought the regulatory system
to an end Paul's final uses of the word νόμος in Romans occur in 13:8 and 10. Various commentators have noted how Romans 13:8 with its regard for the
Torah's regulations being "fulfilled" echoes the thought of 8:4, where the
just requirement expressed in Torah's regulations is "fulfilled" in those
who live by the Spirit.51
 As Paul, in 13:8, revisits the idea of the Law as a
body of regulations being "fulfilled" he lists behavioral details. He quotes
four laws from the Decalogue as commands, έντολαί. He says that the
one who loves fulfills those regulations, and any other regulation. How?
He quotes another law, not as a regulating statement, but as an instructive
one, a λόγος that sums up any other εντολή, disclosing to him love as a core, ongoing responsibility within the ways of God.52
 Paul declares that
the one who heeds the instruction of Lev 19:18 will do what the entire
body of regulations is promoting. Each regulation that he cites portrays a
wrong enacted against another: murder, adultery, theft and coveting.
When one loves, putting a higher regard for the wellbeing of others ahead
of one's own, one will not be involved in such activities. The Law as scripture may instruct about specific activities that wrong others. But as long
as one aims to place the wellbeing of others ahead of one's own, one will
be doing what the written regulations basically advance. One's behavior
will be consistent with the δικαίωμα of the Law, fulfilling its regulations.53
In this use of laws from the Torah, Paul is demonstrating how the Torah's
body of regulations remains valid as an instructive, informing authority.
When regulations can be incorporated into a sense of love, they can be
behaviorally instructive.
That may be one key to Paul's comparatively easy dismissal of food and
holiday regulations in chapter 14. Those laws do not advance an agenda of
love.54
 They are not important to people who realize that they have been
discharged from the law as a regulating authority through the death and
resurrection of Jesus (6:14-15; 7:1-6; 10:4). Only when in the exercise of
freedom one believer offends another should one refrain from inherently
non-injurious behaviors that are prohibited by specific regulations. Why?
Because in so causing offense, and thus causing another believer to stumble, one is not acting in love (14:15). Instead, one would be doing wrong
to a neighbor (13:10). Love becomes a core behavioral principle.55
 In the
obedience of faith that Paul promotes amongst the gentiles, he urges believers in Jesus to love others. When believers do that, they live up to the Law's 
regulatory requirement. As one learns love from commandments and regulations one may enact it in the new life of the Spirit.
Where did Paul acquire his principle of love? From a law found in the
Torah, from the body of regulations that as part of the scriptures always
remains authoritative instruction from which believers in Jesus must continue to learn.56
 When Paul urges those who are strong in faith to put up
with the failings of the weak (15:1), pleasing their "neighbor" ahead of
themselves (15:2, recalling 13:9-10),57
 he does so based first on the warrant offered by the exemplar of Christ. In suffering for the sins of others,
putting up with their failings and bearing insults, Christ provides a
behavioral model.58
 That model appears in the gospel, the declaration of
the death and resurrection of Jesus that earlier in the letter Paul has
announced has discharged law-followers from the "written code of the
law" to place them into the "new life of the Spirit" (7:6). But Paul reasons further in 15:3. He supports the warrant of the model of Christ
with another warrant, the scriptures: "For it is written," says Paul, "the
abuses with which you have been abused have fallen upon me." Paul then
articulates a point that he has been enacting throughout the contents of
the letter: "For whatever was written beforehand was written for our
instruction, so that through the steadfastness and encouragement of the
scriptures we may have hope" (15:4).59
 Paul reminds his readers that all
of the scriptures, of which the regulations of the Law are a part, exist for
instruction, both to promote endurance within the present incompleteness of God's program and to encourage believers to live appropriately in
the meantime.
This does not indicate a detailed, worked out system using law regulations as informing instruction. Paul shows a consistent reluctance even to
appear to construct a gospel-based set of regulations. But one can discern
that for Paul a basic sense of right and wrong emerges from what the regulations communicate, not as regulatory laws within Israel's covenant with
God, but as instructing, informing scripture.60
 That is discernable from
comments earlier in the letter (e.g. 2:18, 20; 3:20; 7:7). The point is even
stronger in 13:9-10, where individual regulations offer specific declarations about "wrong" that can be done to a neighbor. In this same passage,
Paul sees another statement from the body of written regulations, the declaration about love of neighbor that instructs positively what one can do in
order to avoid the wrongs against others detailed in any law, pointing even
to the avoidance of wrongs not specified by a law. In Romans Paul tends to keep his quotations from the Torah separate from
his use of the word for law, νόμος. Most often Paul connects the term
νόμος to the body of authoritative, controlling regulations found in the
Torah. When the term does not clearly denote law as authoritative regulation, its lack of clarity appears in contexts where Paul, in view of the activities of God in Christ, probes shortcomings of the Law's regulations and
the covenant to which they belong. Only once (3:21) does Paul use the
word νόμος exclusively in reference to a segment of the scriptures.
Paul, as a Jew, maintains a consistently high regard for the Law as scripture. He shows respect for what individual laws of the Torah communicate. But he is convinced of the life-changing dimensions of the gospel, the
power of God for salvation for all who believe, whether Jew or Greek.
God's recent activities in Christ, claims Paul, have signaled a further
advancement in the divine program. In light ofthat advancement, he recognizes how the regulations of the Law disclose God-displeasing behavior
amongst both Jews and non-Jews. Additionally in light of that advancement he notes how insistence on pursuing regulations tied to the covenant
between God and Israel alienates non-Jews, in defiance of what God has
done in Jesus. He also recognizes how those regulations appear ineffective
in themselves as words to break the power of sin in people's lives. Those
regulations have been brought to a fulfilled end in Christ, crucified and
raised from the dead, breaking the power of sin. What matters is that those
who belong to God do what the Law's regulations basically aim at, love.
That happens to believers in Jesus who live by the Spirit. One can read the Law as scripture to be informed of God and his ways. But one must connect with God first and foremost on the basis of the crucified, resurrected
Jesus and so participate in the new way of the Spirit, a way that brings life,
instead of condemnation for violating specific standards.
As Paul reads the Torah in view of God's work in Christ, he regards love
of neighbor as a chief principle by which other regulations should be
understood. Rather than dwelling on the upholding of specific regulations,
believers should aim to treat others properly. That appears to be missing in
the practice of some believers in Rome. If the "saints" in Rome are to stand
in solidarity with one who advocates "the obedience of faith," they must
stand in solidarity with one another. To do that, they must reflect a standard that is important to God as expressed in the scriptures, the standard of
love. Paul derives that standard in view of the activities of God in Christ,
not from the pursuit of a specific regulation, but from a sense of what he
considers many of the regulations to be promoting. He learns that standard, not from adhering to regulations, but from considering what they
instruct. The scriptures, for Paul, remain important in informing the faith
and life of those who believe in God through Jesus. 
