New Testament scholars agree that behind James' condemnation of
wealthy individuals who persecute the poor in 5:1-6 stands a parallel
Jewish tradition which commonly treats the poor and oppressed as a
collective symbol of righteousness (Prov. 1:11; Eccl. 4:1-4; Wis. 2:18-20;
1 En 94 ff.). 1 An initial reading of this passage suggests its purpose is
to fill out statements made earlier in 2:1-6. In 2:6 James reminded his
readers that it was the rich who oppress and drag them into court. 2
Here in 5:1-6 he now addresses the rich and accuses them of abusing
the poor by using deceitful business practices and unfairly benefiting
from their labor.
Problematical, however, are the enigmatic statements of 5:6: 'You
have condemned, you have killed the righteous one; he does not resist
you. 5 One question that has intrigued scholars is: who is the murdered
righteous individual? Suggestions for the identification of this righteous
one have ranged from Jesus as the one executed by the Jewish aris-
tocracy 3 to James himself as the titular head of a righteous community
under attack. 4 The general consensus, however, is that the statement
is not referring to a specific individual but is a collective singular used
to describe all who are righteous, poor, and oppressed. 5
While this is certainly the case there does seem to be something
more behind this accusation than just a collective singular. If one lis-
tens closer to the statements found in 5:1-6 it is possible to hear an
echo of the Cain and Abel story from Genesis 4:6-10. Indeed, this
would not be the first time such an echo has been heard. A number
of scholars have noted that the cry of the harvesters reaching the ears
of the Lord of hosts in James 5:4 is similar to Abel's blood crying out
to the Lord from the ground in Genesis 4:10. 6 What this paper seeks
to demonstrate, however, is that behind the statements in James 5:1-6
lays not only an echo of Genesis 4:10 but the elements of a develop-
ing tradition which found its source in the Cain and Abel story. This
tradition, which can be traced through a number of Jewish and Christian
works, often portrayed Cain as the representative of wicked individuals
who oppressed the poor and Abel as the representative of righteous
individuals who suffered unjustly. 7 This will be accomplished in four
stages by: (1) tracing Jewish/Christian traditions which considered the
figure of Abel as a literary archetype for righteousness and unjust
suffering; (2) tracing Jewish/Christian traditions which considered the
figure of Cain an archetype for those who oppress the poor and the
righteous for self-gain; (3) examining how some interpreters in late
antiquity attempted to deal with the problem of Abel's talking blood;
and (4) considering the statements and setting of James 5:1-6 in the
light of these.
Before giving consideration to a developing Cain and Abel tradition
it will be helpful to first review the story as it is found in Genesis 4:1-15.
Here we are told that Adam and Eve, having been recently expelled
from the Garden of Eden, produced two sons. Cain, the eldest, was
a farmer whose offering was inexplicably rejected by God. The youngest
was a shepherd named Abel whose offering was accepted by God and,
as a result, was murdered by his brother Cain. Following the murder
the reader is treated to a dialogue in which Cain attempts to deny to
God his murderous act, but is rebuffed by God who can hear the
voice of his brother's blood crying out from the earth. The entire story
consists of only fifteen verses and does not provide us with much insight
into Cain's motive for killing his brother. In both Jewish and Christian
texts of our period, however, this story was often expanded upon in
various ways. This can be traced out in numerous works.
In Jewish and Christian literature of the period Abel was often held
up as an archetype for the martyred righteous. For instance, in Josephus
we are told that Abel was one who had regard for righteousness and
virtue whereas his vocation as a shepherd is only mentioned as an
aside {Ant 1.53). Philo has much to say about Abel, but his views are
best summarized by his description of the younger son as the embodiment
of holiness and virtue (Sacr. 3.10; 4.14; QG 1.59); one who refers every-
thing to God and represents all those who love God (Worse 32). 8 Targum
Neofiti, in good Targumic fashion, takes advantage of the lacuna in the
text and expands upon the Genesis account by speculating that Abel's
offering was accepted by God because he was righteous (Tg. Neofi Gen
4:8). In 1 Enoch 22.6-7 Abel is depicted as the proto-type of all those
9
who have suffered unjusdy and cry out to God to avenge their death.
The culmination of these expansions among Jewish authors may in
fact appear in the Testament of Abraham. Here the humiliation which
seemed to be the mark of Abel's death in Genesis is reversed and the
innocent victim becomes judge of humanity. 10 Abel is no longer simply
a symbol for the martyred righteous, but has in fact become the escha-
tological judge who will distinguish between the righteous and the
wicked (7: AL· 13:3-9).
Some New Testament authors also considered Abel to be the pro­
totypical righteous figure. In Matthew 23:35 Abel is designated as Abel
the Righteous ("Αβελ του δικαίου) and is used as an example by the
Matthean Jesus to condemn those who shed innocent blood. 11 In 1
John 3:12 we are told, as in Targum Neofiti, that the reason his offering
was accepted over that of Cain's was because Abel was righteous (οτι
τα έργα αύτοΰ πονηρά ήν τα δε τοΰ άδελφοΰ αυτού δίκαια.). This is
also the case in Hebrews 11:4 where we find Abel is declared to be
righteous because he offered his sacrifice in faith (Πίστει πλείονα θυσίαν
"Αβελ παρά Κάϊν προσήνεγκεν τφ θεφ, δι' τις έμαρτυρήθη είναι δίκαιος).
Such interpretative tendencies by Christians extend into later cen­
turies as well with writers like the author of 1 Clement holding up
Abel as the example of righteous behavior (3.4-4.7). If a culmination
of this tradition is to be identified in Christian literature it is surely
located in Augustine's City of God. In a comparison of the city of God
with the earthly city Augustine says:
Cain was followed by Abel, who was killed by his brother and served as the first
prophetic symbol of the city of God. He was like an alien on earth, destined to
suffer cruel persecutions at the hands of the wicked men who can properly be
called natives of earth because they love this world as their home and find hap­
piness in the worldly felicity of the earthly city [City of God, 15.15). 12
From this short overview it is clear that for many Abel came to
represent righteous individuals who were oppressed and sometimes
murdered. This tradition is not restricted to one genre of literature
nor can any one particular group claim sole ownership of the tradition.
It is somewhat multi-faceted in its application to oppressed individuals
and undoubtedly was intended to encourage those who were being
oppressed. Although Abel was certainly an important figure to Jewish and
Christian writers in late antiquity, one could argue that Cain held their
interest even more. In the literature of our period Cain came to rep­
resent all that was reprehensible about humanity. As with Abel this
can be traced out in numerous works.
In his rendition of Genesis 4 Josephus notes that Cain was wholly
wicked and only looking to gain (Ant. 1.53). The fact that he was a
tiller of the earth is, as with the description of Abel as a shepherd,
only an aside. But Josephus does not end his attack on Cain's character
here. After recounting Abel's murder and Cain's punishment, Josephus
goes on to claim that Cain continued to become even more wicked
(Ant. 1.60). He increased his property and possessions through robbery
and force and become a teacher of wickedness to others. And as if
this was not enough, Josephus credits Cain with the invention of weights
and measures which led humanity away from a simple life based on
trust into one steeped in deception, dishonesty and the continued pursuit
to increase possessions and property (Ant. 1.61). 13
Although Philo does not credit Cain with the invention of weights
and measures, he does emphasize the notion that Cain was driven to
gain more property and possessions. This is predicated on Philo's under­
standing of Cain's name as meaning 'possession' (Cherubim, 52). The
central flaw in Cain's character, according to Philo, was his failure to
recognize that all possessions belonged to God rather than him (Cherubim,
52, 65). 14 For Philo, Cain is the ultimate narcissist. He represents self-
love and those who are willing to go to any lengths in order to secure
riches, honor, glory and authority. According to Philo, Cain's partisans
are those in society who are rich, Uve a life of luxury, are strangers
to labor and are constantly in the company of those people or things
that bring them pleasure (Worse 32-34). In his efforts to portray Cain
as an archetype he labels anyone who is a lover of self as a 'Cain'
and therefore a murderer (Worse 78). Noting that Genesis never dis-
cusses how or when Cain died, Philo concludes that his wickedness
lives on and thus, like Cain, never dies (Corf. 122; Fug. 60, 64). In this
way, Philo is able to attribute the presence of evil in the world and
the pursuit of possessions to the ongoing influence of Cain and those
who follow in his footsteps.
The sentiments of Philo and Josephus can be heard in other literature
of this period. For instance, the Testament of Benjamin 7.4-5 states that
Cain was condemned through a combination of Abel's murder and
his own evil deeds. Consequently, all those who are like Cain will also
be judged and punished. Even when Cain is not mentioned by name
an echo of Genesis 4 can sometimes be heard. For instance, in Wisdom
10:3 we are told: "But when an unrighteous man departed from her
in his anger, he perished because in rage he slew his brother". Perhaps
even more descriptive are the statements in Sirach 34:19-22:
The Most High is not pleased with the offerings of the ungodly; and he is not
propitiated for sins by a multitude of sacrifices. 20 Like one who kills a son before
his father's eyes is the man who offers a sacrifice from the property of the poor.
21
The bread of the needy is the life of the poor; whoever deprives them of it is
a man of blood. 22 To take away a neighbor's living is to murder him; to deprive
an employee of his wages is to shed blood.
Although Cain is not mentioned by name in this passage there are
several traits listed here that is part of an interpretive trajectory con-
cerning Cain: (1) a rejected offering; (2) the crime of murder; (3) depriv-
ing the poor of their property and wages; and (4) the claim that the
oppression of the poor is analogous to shedding innocent blood. What
this may indicate is the existence of two parallel traditions that some-
times interconnect. On the one hand there is a strong tradition which
condemns those who oppress the poor. On the other hand, there is
yet another tradition which also condemns the oppression of the poor,
but identifies the oppressors with wicked Cain and the oppressed with
righteous Abel. Because of the considerable thematic overlaps between
the two traditions, one could easily move between them without the
need to mention Cain and Abel by name. As the traditions developed,
Cain and Abel became archetypes for the wicked oppressors and the
righteous poor and it was not necessary to differentiate between the
two traditions. Yet another example of such an overlap may be found
in 1 Enoch 99.11-16 where, as in Josephus, the wicked are described
as those who use deceitful weights and measures and building homes
through the labor of others. Although Cain is not mentioned by name
the parallels between the two traditions are notable.
If we may identify a final stage in the development of this tradition
in Jewish sources, it would almost certainly be located in the Midrashim.
In Genesis Rabbah 22.9 we find Cain associated with Psalms 37:14 which
states: "The wicked draw the sword and bend their bows, to bring
down the poor and needy, to slay those who walk uprightly." Proverbs
28:3 says a poor man who oppresses the poor is a like beating rain
that leaves no food. This proverb is referenced in Exodus Rabbah 31.17
and applied to Cain of whom it is said he was impatient to possess
the whole earth and that his desire for property and possessions moti­
vated him to kill Abel. Finally, in Ecclesiastes Rabbah 2.1 we find that
the person described in Ecclesiastes 6:3 who Uves many years but does
not have satisfaction of soul is alluding to Cain because he was not
satisfied with his money and his possessions. 15
Christian authors also followed this interpretive trajectory. 1 John
3:12 describes Cain as unrighteous and a murderer (πονηρού ήν καΐ
εσφαξεν τον άδελφον αύτοΰ). In Jude 11 those who walk in the way
of Cain are condemned (τη όδψ του Κάϊν) a statement which resonates
with the claim made by Josephus and Philo that not only was Cain evil
but he also instructed others how to perform evil deeds. 16 1 Clement 4.7
views Cain as the prototype of hatred and envy towards one's brother
that leads to murder (ζήλος καί φθόνος άδελφοκτονίαν κατειργάσατο).
Augustine, clearly dependent upon Philo, views Cain as one who is
constantly in search of earthly wealth and never dies. 17
What the above demonstrates is that there existed a developing
interpretive tradition that considered Cain to be the archetype for those
who oppressed the poor and sought to increase their own property
holdings and possessions through either deceptive means or force. By
associating such actions with the figure of Cain, authors were able to
label such individuals as murderers either through a simple association
or through direct accusation as found in Philo and the Testament of
Benjamin. Even when Cain is not mentioned by name, or an overlapping
with similar traditions concerning the oppression of the poor occurs,
clear echoes of the Genesis story and the developing tradition are
identifiable.
The final aspect of the Genesis account to which we now turn our
attention is the voice of Abel's blood in 4:10 which cries out to God
from the ground. Although Cain attempted to deny his treacherous
actions it is Abel's blood that attracted God's attention to the scene.
When later interpreters approached this passage, however, they were
faced with an interpretive conundrum: why is the blood in the plural
and thus resulting in a reading which, if literally translated, means the
"voice of your brother's bloods" ÇU1 'Tip D'pj» "[TTK)? How should
this wrinkle in the text be understood?
For the compilers of the Mishnah the fact that the blood was in
the plural indicated that it was not only Abel who was murdered but
also any potential children (m. Sanh. 4:40). 18 However, these are not
merely potential children, but, as some ancient interpreters suggested,
children who would have been righteous as Abel was righteous. 19 This
is particularly evident in Targums Neofiti, and Terushalmi where God
accuses Cain of killing a 'great multitude of righteous'. 20
Some interpreters, however, chose not to contend with the problem
of the blood. Josephus, for instance, completely avoids mentioning the
talking blood by not including it in his version of the Cain and Abel
story. Instead the reader is left to guess how God knew that Abel was
dead (Ant. 1.55-56). 21 Philo employs a similar approach when he over­
looks the blood and only concerns himself with Abel's voice which he
understands as God continuing to hear the prayers of the worthy even
though they are dead (QG 70). 22
Such an interpretive strategy may be behind Hebrews 11:4 where
we are told that although Abel is dead he is still speaking (ετι λαλεί).
Here the author does not seem to be concerned with Abel's blood but
the ongoing effects of the voice which cries out. However, later in
Hebrews 12:24 Abel's blood is mentioned and is said 'to speak' but
not as loud as Christ's blood. 23 This reticence to mention the blood
is what Ruzer has identified as a "focus on the ongoing spiritual exis­
tence of Abel" and thus the lack of any need for the blood except to
communicate the continued crying out of the innocent before God. 24
Thus righteous Abel continues to speak even after his death.
The clearest example of this motif is found in 1 Enoch 22.6-7 where
once again blood is absent and instead is replaced with the spirit and
voice of Abel which continues to cry out to God. 25 Along with him
are many other spirits who were killed and together they appeal to
God until Cain's seed should be exterminated from the earth. Although
it is difficult to determine if the spirits which cry out with Abel are
meant to indicate his own potential righteous offspring, it is clear that
the passage is working to some degree within that interpretive under-
standing of the plural blood found in Genesis 4:10. Yet another pas-
sage in 1 Enoch is the scene described in 47.1-4. Here there is no
mention of Cain but a comparison of 47.1-4 with 22.6-7 reveals a
considerable overlap. Both of the passages are concerned with murdered
righteous individuals who cry out to God asking for vengeance. In
47.4 we read that it is the prayers of the righteous along with their
blood that has risen up to the Lord of the Spirits. As with the passages
in Wisdom 10:3 and Sirach 34:19-22 examined above, it is apparent
that an overlap of the Cain and Abel tradition with that of oppressed
righteous individuals does occur. One could easily read 1 Enoch 47.1-4,
even without the benefit of 22:6-7, and perceive the allusion to Abel's
blood crying out to God in Genesis 4:10.
Jon Levenson has commented: "That Abel should have died a tragic
death neither avenged nor reversed stuck in the craw of the ongoing
Jewish and Christian traditions. How could the God of justice have
failed to counteract an injustice of such magnitude?" 26 This dissonance
described by Levenson often led to a retelling of the story crafted in
such a way so that vengeance was demanded from God. For instance,
in Jubilees 4.3 we are told that Abel's blood cried out to God in order
to make an accusation against Cain. In the passages from 1 Enoch
examined above (22.6-7; 44.1-4), it is clear that the purpose of crying
out by Abel and the righteous multitudes is to ask God to either
remove Cain's ancestors or those who have murdered the righteous
from the earth. 27 In Matthew 23:35 and Luke 11:49-51 vengeance is
a central part of Jesus' condemnation of the religious establishment.
The blood of those who have been murdered demands that God avenge
the death of the righteous. 28 Even in Hebrews 11:4 where Abel's blood
is not mentioned it can still be argued that vengeance is part of the
passage's theme. Ton Hilhorst has noted:
The Hebrews author takes up the blood's crying but transforms its tenor. From
the fact that Abel's blood was crying after the murder he infers that it keeps on
crying up to the present and he interprets the cry for vengeance as a claim for
final justice. Abel's crying testifies to his faith in the things hoped for, his con-
viction that in the end all evil will be punished and all righteousness rewarded. 29
The fact that the author of Hebrews describes Abel as continuing
to speak after his death, juxtaposes Abel's blood with that of Christ's
in 12:24 and declares God as judge in 11:23, seems to suggest a famil-
iarity with tradition of Abel, and perhaps his righteous offspring, crying
out for vengeance. But in the context of early Christianity, the blood
of Christ becomes a symbol not only of the new covenant but also
the symbol of vengeance against those who fall under God's judgment.
Thus Christ's blood is a voice that cries out for vengeance even louder
than that of Abel. 30
What the above survey has demonstrated is that there existed two
parallel traditions in Judaism and Christianity which were concerned
with how the righteous poor were oppressed by the wicked rich. The
first tradition was a broad condemnation of the practices of those rich
individuals who oppressed these righteous poor in order to further
enrich themselves. The cries and the blood of the righteous individu-
als were portrayed as continually ascending to God requesting vengeance
even if they had been murdered. The parallel tradition followed the
same trajectory as the first, but rather than describe the situation in
general terms, those working in this tradition borrowed imagery from
the Cain and Abel story in order to establish archetypes of the wicked
rich and the righteous poor. Because the traditions were both focused
on the same goal, condemnation of the rich, one did not have to
choose between them. Both traditions were equally useful and over-
lapped to such a degree that one could easily read the one and still
hear echoes of the other.
Returning now to James 5:1-6 it seems possible that, based upon
the evidence laid out above, James was working within both of these
traditions, particularly that of Cain and Abel. The setting for the passage
in James is the condemnation of the rich who have abused the poor.
However, the eschatological tone of the passage changes to one of
encouragement in 5:7 when James once again shifts his remarks to the
oppressed by calling for patience and promising them that God will
act on their behalf in the future. 31 This is similar to what we have
already seen in 1 Enoch. But there are at least two echoes which may
link James' statements here with the Cain and Abel tradition.
The first echo is located in 5:3-5. Here we are told that the rich
have abused and stolen the wages of the harvesters and that their
cries have reached the Lord of hosts. As noted above, several NT
scholars have observed the parallel between James 5:4 and Genesis
4:10. 32 The fact that James does not include any allusion to blood cry-
ing out is not a problem because, as we saw in Josephus, Philo, Hebrews
and 1 Enoch, it is not the blood that is important but the ongoing
cry for the Lord to avenge the oppressed. Thus in order for James to
communicate the plight of the oppressed to his readers it was only
necessary to describe the call which was raised by all those who, like
Abel, suffered at the hands of their oppressors. As in many of the tra-
ditions concerning Cain examined above, it is through deceit and
forced labor that the rich are able to enjoy a Ufe of pleasure. Thus it
appears that James is working within that tradition which identified
Cain as the archetype of the wicked even though he is not mentioned
by name. like Wisdom 10:3, Sirach 34:19-22 and 1 Enoch 99.11-16,
explicitly naming Cain was not necessary. But because the two tradi-
tions overlapped significantly, James could merely point out the char-
acteristics of the wicked rich which were also commonly associated
with Cain. Readers who were familiar with the tradition would under-
stand the significance of the cries of the oppressed reaching the ears
of the Lord.
The second echo is located in the enigmatic statements of 5:6. In
5:6a we find James accusing the rich of condemning and killing the
righteous one. While many NT scholars have concluded that this right-
eous individual is a collective singular for all oppressed peoples, it
seems possible that if James' statements in 5:4 are an echo of Genesis
4:10, then the righteous one is not merely a collective singular but is
also reference to Abel as the archetype of all righteous individuals.
The murder of this individual fits quite nicely with the Genesis account
as well as the way the tradition developed later. The point, then, is
that one need not decide between Abel and a collective singular when
identifying the righteous individual. The overlapping traditions would
allow for both options at the same time without the need for one to
take precedence over the other. 33 Moreover, when we then examine
the resistance offered by the murdered individual (ουκ αντιτάσσεται
ύμίν) in 5:6b it resonates with what we have already seen in the Cain
and Abel tradition.
The interpretation of 5:6b depends on how one understands the
Greek in this sentence. What does James mean by the righteous one
resisting? If we understand the phrase ουκ αντιτάσσεται ύμίν as occurring
in the indicative mood, as some have, then it appears that we have a
conundrum. How can the righteous poor not be resisting the rich? But
if we understood the statement in 5:6b as interrogative, i.e. a rhetorical
question, as does Westcott and Hort, Peter Davids and some French
translations, 34 the result, then, is a statement which describes an action
similar to the ongoing outcry of the righteous; The continual cry to
God for vengeance even though the righteous are dead. In Philo, 1
Enoch and Hebrews the voice and spirit of Abel was described as con­
tinually crying out to the Lord. If James is working within the Cain
and Abel tradition, then portraying the righteous individual (s) as one
who is abused, murdered and then continues to resist the wicked rich
(i.e by calling out to God) even after death would be in keeping with
the interpretive trajectory of the tradition. 35
It seems that in light of the literary context, there is possibly more
to the background of James 5:1-6 than has been appreciated and the
statements contained therein might not be as enigmatic as previously
thought. It is clear that there were two developing traditions sur-
rounding the abuse of the poor by the rich which sometimes used the
Cain and Abel story as an illustration. The statements found in James
5:1-6 seem to be an echo of this developing tradition. If, as seems
possible, James' readers were familiar with the way that the tradition
incorporated the condemnation of the rich as part of the Cain and
Abel story, then it would not be impossible for them to hear the echoes
of Genesis 4 in James' statements. Thus their conclusion would have
been that those who oppress the poor and withhold their wages are
guilty of sin. That is, they are living in the shadow of Cain.