The relationship between the present world and the new creation envi­
sioned by early Jews and Christians is never easy to specify, and the escha-
tological perspective of any given ancient author can rarely be neatly
classified. For the book of Revelation, some degree of clarity can neverthe­
less be gained by paying attention to the negative statements John 1 includes
in his description of the new heaven and earth. By attending to what the
new creation is not, it may be possible to learn something of what John
thinks it is.
There are seven things for which John uses the formula ουκ εστίν ετι or
ουκ εσται ετι in Rev 21-22. 2 This article examines the first, and perhaps
the most obscure of the list. At the beginning of the books final vision,
John sees "a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first
earth have passed away—and the sea (θάλασσα) is no more" (21:1).
There are several possible parallels that have been adduced for the enig­
matic last phrase, but before examining these it is worth considering how
the text of Revelation itself prepares readers for the seas disappearance. By
examining the associated images and contexts that define the function of
the sea within the books symbolic universe in the material leading up to
chapter 21, it may be possible to glean clues for interpreting its absence
from the new creation. 3 This task is made difficult by the sheer volume of
sea imagery in the book, 4 but for the sake of convenience the material can
be classified into several discrete categories that can be analysed separately.
In the discussion that follows, the intention in each case will be to deter­
mine the precise referent of θάλασσα and to consider the potential
significance of the usage for understanding Rev 21:1c.
Quite often in Revelation the sea is simply one integral element of the cre-
ated order—along with the earth (7:1-3), heaven (5:13; 10:2-8) and the
springs of water (14:7)—and it contains creatures (8:9; 10:6) that are
capable of praising God and the lamb (5:13). As a part of creation, the sea
suffers with the earth at the hands of the devil (12:12) and from the judge-
ments carried out by Gods angels (8:8-9; 16:3). The sea is no different in
this regard from any other part of Revelations cosmos, and its passing
away might be expected to parallel that of the first heaven and earth, which
flee from before the throne in 20:11 to make way for the new creation.
This aspect of Johns portrayal of the sea has led some commentators to
deny that the sea entails any special significance in Rev 21:1 beyond its
literal reference to the ocean. 5 At most, they might note that the sea could
have been particularly frightening for land-dwellers or might have been
regarded as a barrier between the churches and John, exiled on Patmos. 6
Such an explanation ultimately fails, however, to account adequately for
Rev 21:1c. It ignores, for example, the fact that the missing sea is men-
tioned separately from the passing away of the first heaven and earth; if
John were merely emphasising that the entire tripartite cosmos of the first
creation is gone, it is more likely that he would have included the mention
of the sea along with the heaven and earth in 21:1 and that his description
of the new heaven and the new earth would also have included a new sea.
Instead, this is the last mention of the sea in the book; whatever is refer­
enced by θάλασσα in 21:1c, it apparently has no place in the renewed
cosmos.
The association of the sea with six other more clearly negative images
(the death, mourning, sorrow, pain, everything cursed, and night that also
are no more) suggests in any case that θάλασσα in 21:1 bears significance
beyond the merely literal. As we will see, John provides readers with ample
evidence elsewhere in Revelation that the sea of his symbolic world can
indeed encompass a wide range of negative associations.
The first mention of an ocean in Revelation comes at Rev 4:6, where John
sees before the throne something like a sea, a "sea of glass like crystal". 7 The
image is similar to that described in Ezek 1:22, where Ezekiel sees stretched
out over the heads of the living creatures something like "a firmament,
like the appearance of ice" (mpn pìD ΪΡρΊ; LXX στερέωμα ως ορασις
κρυστάλλου). 8 In Johns vision, Ezekiels dome has become equivalent to
the heavenly sea itself, separating heaven from earth, and God s enthrone­
ment over this sea echoes the biblical picture of the Lord enthroned over
the flood and his sovereignty over the waters.
This picture assumes that the sea of glass before the throne in Rev 4:6 is
meant to be seen as a vast, glassy expanse forming at once the floor of
9
heaven and—by extension—the ceiling above the earth. Such a concep­
tion is well-supported by ancient descriptions of the firmament and the
heavenly throne-room. 10 Some have argued, however, that the reference
both here and in 15:2 (and possibly in 21:1c) is actually to a basin, akin to
the laver in the temple.
For a number of commentators, temple cosmology is in fact of central
importance for understanding the setting of Revelation generally and 21:1
in particular. One of the more thorough treatments from this perspective
is found in B.W. Snyder's unpublished PhD dissertation, where the setting
for all of Johns visions is construed as a heavenly tabernacle or temple.
Snyder specifically equates the throne-room of Rev 4-5 with the holy of
holies of the tabernacle, 11 in which the sea of glass of Rev 4:6 is analogous
to the laver that according to tradition was located in the outer court of the
tabernacle or temple (Exod 30:18; 1 Kgs 7:39; 2 Chr 4:10). In part because
the sea can represent a reservoir of evil and especially because its represen­
tative basin is located in the court outside of the holy of holies, Snyder
argues that it is necessarily absent from the new heaven and new earth
when all creation has become equivalent to the holy of holies. That the
new creation is meant to be conceived as the holy of holies is suggested by
the claim that in the New Jerusalem, God will "tabernacle" (σκηνώσει)
with his people (21:3) and that located in the city s cubic space shall be the
throne of God and the Lamb (22:3). On this reading, Rev 11:1-2 is seen
to prepare readers for the removal of everything but the holy of holies by
emphasising that the measuring of the temple excludes its outer court.
Thus the court and everything in it—including the symbolic "sea"—will
not be protected from the trampling of the nations and will be forever
outside the New Jerusalem.
Snyder's creative thesis has much to commend it, and she recognises
that even if the "sea of glass" is akin to the tabernacle or temple laver, it
need not lose its cosmic significance since temples themselves could be
considered microcosms of the universe. Her explanation of Rev 21:1c nev­
ertheless remains unconvincing. In Rev 4:6, for example, John describes
the sea as ενώπιον του θρόνου. If the throne-room is the holy of holies that
will one day encompass all of creation, why should the sea no longer be
present if it is "before the throne" just as the seven burning torches
are ενώπιον του θρόνου (4:5)? Snyder attempts to evade this difficulty
by noting that even the Jerusalem temple laver can in one instance, at
2 Kings 25:13, be described as "in the temple"; she suggests that Johns
readers are meant to recognise that even though it may sound as though
the glassy sea is in the throne-room, it is actually "out in the court where it
belongs". 12 But if John intends readers to catch the point that this sea is
actually outside the throne room and therefore cannot be expected to make
it in to the new heaven and earth, he surely would make this point more
clear. It thus is unlikely that Rev 4:6 should be interpreted in this way or
that temple cosmology can provide a sufficient explanation for Rev 21:1c.
The reference to a sea in Rev 4:6 serves primarily to locate readers in the
throne room, and it may well hint at the Lord s sovereignty over its stilled
waters. Revelation 15:2, however, provides further associations for this
θάλασσα υαλίνη. Here the "sea of glass" is "mixed with fire" 13 and is that
upon which those who have overcome the beast and his image are said to
be standing. 14 Just before this description, John has introduced the seven
angels with the seven last plagues which will complete God s wrath. The
vision of the "overcomers" standing on the sea of glass mixed with fire
forms an interlude between this introduction and the carrying out of the
judgements of the bowl angels. As in T. Levi 3:2, where the heavenly sea is
described as fidi of fire and ice prepared to carry out Gods judgement,
15
the sea of glass mixed with fire in Rev 15:2 likely portends the plagues
about to he poured out on the world in chapter 16. Johns use of fire imag­
ery elsewhere in Revelation is telling, as it is nearly always associated with
judgement (cf. 8:5,7,8; 9:17-18; 11:5; 14:10; 16:8; 18:8; 19:20; 20:9,10,
14-15; 21:8). 16 Thus, although it is possible to take the fire in the heavenly
sea as representative of the trials through which the saints have safely
passed, this must be secondary to the significance of fire as representative
of the judgements about to be poured out. 17
That these judgements are called pkgues reveals that this is an instance
of the exodus typology that is prevalent in Revelation; most of the bowl
18
judgements in fact find direct parallels in the exodus plagues. Johns
vision of the "overcomers" standing on a sea singing "the song of Moses" at
Rev 15 seems deliberately drawn so as to echo the experience of the Israel­
1
ites at the φΟ'Ο in Exod 14-15. This allusion to the exodus supports the
idea that the sea of glass mixed with fire signifies the punishments about to
be poured out on God's enemies, and it adds the nuance that it is beyond
this sea that God s people will find themselves established on Mount Zion
(14:1) in the presence of God and the Lamb (7:15) with their sorrows
wiped away (7:17).
To the extent that the sea of Rev 21:1c borrows from the significance of
the heavenly sea of Rev 4 and 15, its absence from the new creation could
imply the accomplishment of a second exodus for the exiled people of
God, and therefore the removal of the sea as a barrier between God s
people and their promised homeland—as well as the end of the judgement
it threatens. 19 But to what extent can the images of the heavenly sea serve
to inform the interpretation of Rev 21:1 in any case? It will be argued
below that the exodus imagery that appears in Rev 4 and 15 (but also else­
where in the book) may indeed be important for the interpretation of
Rev 21:1c. But unless it were only or primarily the heavenly sea that fea­
tured in the book, or there were clear markers that it is specifically the
heavenly sea that is meant by θάλασσα in Rev 21:1, it seems unlikely that
readers could be expected to understand the "sea that is no more" as equiv­
alent to the sea of glass in heaven. The significance of the other uses of sea
imagery in Revelation must therefore be taken into account before reach­
ing any firm conclusions.
One of the most memorable images in Revelation is that of the dragon
standing on the shore of the sea as a great and terrible beast emerges from
its waters (13:1). As well as serving as the origin of this monster, the sea
gathers a number of other negative connotations in chapters 12-13. In
Rev 12:9, for example, John apparendy equates the devil Satan with both
the serpent of Gen 3 (όφις) and the sea monster Leviathan (ό δράκων ό
μέγας). 20 By turning Leviathan into a picture of Satan himself, John links
the ancient sea monster closely to the source of cosmic evil and imbues the
sea itself with connotations of evil and opposition to God. As is made clear
at 11:7 and 17:8, where the same beast that comes up from the sea at 13:1
is described as having come up from the άβυσσος, 21 this sea is not merely
the Mediterranean or earthly sea, but it is the primeval sea to which all
other seas are linked, the deep abyss which can yield springs of water but
which also conceals dark spirits and imprisons the giants of old. 22
Thus, although Rev 21:1 does not say the άβυσσος is no more, the link
between this region and the sea suggests that the connotations associated
with the abyss may be included in the removal of the sea. This adds to the
sense of the sea in Revelation as a realm of potential evil and an instrument
of judgement, and it contributes the further idea that this region can be
linked with death.
But if it is the images of chapters 12-13 that are to inform our under­
standing of Rev 21:1, it is possible that the mythology of these chapters,
drawn from Scripture and the wider world of the Ancient Near East, plays
a role in 21:1 as well. 23 There is at least a possibility that in Rev 21:1 John
is alluding to the common narrative of a divine warriors defeat of the sea
and the forces of disorder and chaos prior to restoring fertility and order.
Baal and Anats defeat of the sea monster was possibly linked in some way
with creation, and there is a suggestion of this theme in Old Testament
passages that apparently link God's defeat of the sea monster with cre­
ation. 24 Such a restoration or act of creation is accompanied in some
instances by a banquet, the assumption of kingship and the building of a
25
temple—all themes that can be argued to lie behind Rev 21-22. The
mention of the doing away with the sea in Rev 21:1 may thus be intended
to echo this common motif of combat myth.
One possible piece of evidence for linking the sea of 21:1 with an ancient
combat myth is the parallel statement in 21:4 that ό θάνατος ουκ εσται
ετι. Given that Baal and his consort Anat s two great battles were against
Yam, or sometimes the associated Lïtàn, and Mot, it could be that John is
reflecting a similar scenario in which the primary opponents of the deity,
sea and death, are finally defeated. A.Y. Collins has in fact argued that the
use of the sea as adversary in Rev 21:1 demonstrates that "the author of
Revelation was in touch with some contemporary form of the Semitic
mythic pattern". "It is unlikely', she claims, "that a statement like Rev 21:1
could have been simply derived from the OT". 26
It would perhaps be more precise to say that the weight of the evidence
from Rev 12-13 does suggest that John had more combat-myth material to
work with than what is hinted at in Scripture; but his basic reliance on the
Old Testament throughout Revelation means that his use of extra-biblical
mythic material is likely to have been reworked in its light and even to
derive much of its significance from scriptural categories. The primary
adversary of Gods people in Revelation is in any case not the sea, but the
devil and the beasts which have already been destroyed by the time we
reach Rev 21:1. That the sea gives rise to one of these beasts suggests its
association with cosmic evil (something John may well have considered
consistent with its biblical image), but it cannot be said that the sea emerges
as a key adversary of God in the book prior to 21:1. This cautions us
against too quickly personifying the sea as an independent agent opposed
to God even in Rev 21:1c.
In a quite different use of Rev 12-13 to interpret 21:1, some commentators
have suggested that because the sea and the earth represent the origin of
the beasts and kings in Dan 7 and because John similarly describes beasts
coming up from both the sea and the earth (Rev 13:1,11), the significance
of the sea and earth is primarily to represent the mass of peoples who are
opposed to God—the "earth dwellers" and the "peoples and multitudes
and nations and tongues" who are equated in one instance with the "waters"
(ΰδατα) upon which the "prostitute of Babylon" sits (Rev 17:1, 15). 27
Schmidt has argued that this equation of the waters with peoples and
nations reveals the primary significance of the sea's removal in 21:1.
"Human chaos must go", he says, "in order to make possible a perfect
community into which nothing unclean can ever enter". 28 For Schmidt,
the New Jerusalem itself is equivalent to "redeemed humanity"; indeed, he
claims that the vision of Rev 21-22 bears no spatial significance; the new
creation is a people, not a place.
Schmidt sheds some light on an important theme associated with the
sea and possibly linked to its disappearance from the new creation. His
explanation nevertheless overemphasises what is only a subsidiary use of
sea imagery in Revelation and makes it the controlling theme. The com­
parison of the sea or waters with enemies is in fact a simile drawn from the
cosmological and mythological significance of the sea that is prevalent else­
where in the book. Schmidt's assertion that the New Jerusalem is envi­
sioned solely as a people is also misleading; Bauckham more accurately
describes John's portrait as encompassing people, place and divine pres­
ence. 29 Thus, although the image of the many waters as people opposed to
God adds to the negative connotations John assigns to water imagery in
Revelation, this image is not determinative or particularly illuminating for
understanding Rev 21:1.
One negative function of the physical sea in Revelation is to facilitate Baby­
lon's idolatrous trade. The way in which Babylon is destroyed—thrown
like a millstone into the sea (18:21)—hints at John's view of the poetic
justice inherent in the created order and in God's judgements (cf. Rev
11:18), and it once again closely associates the sea with judgement. The
image also links the sea with death, especially when read alongside Ezek
30
26:19-21, a passage that has influenced John's imagery at this point. In
Ezekiel's oracle against Tyre, the city is covered by the abyss—by many
waters—and is forced to descend with all "those who go down into the pit"
(v. 20).
It is possible that the link between the sea and Babylon's economic
exploitation is part of the reason the sea is no more in Rev 21:1; support
could be adduced from the deliberate contrast made in chapters 21-22
between the bride, the New Jerusalem, with the prostitute Babylon that sat
on many waters. John's use of Ezek 26-27 in Rev 18 suggests in any case
that this depiction is not divorced from the symbolical and mythological
resonances of the sea. The images of chapters 17-18 contribute to the over­
all sense that the sea can be linked to activities opposed to the creator's will,
hint that its waters can bring death and emphasise once again its potential
to be used for judgement.
We have seen that Babylon's destruction in the sea and the link between
the sea, the beast and the abyss suggest a close relationship between the sea
and death. This association emerges most clearly at Rev 20:13, where the
sea, death and Hades give up the dead prior to the last judgement. In a
survey of this relatively common theme—the region of the dead giving up
the dead at the resurrection—Bauckham has demonstrated that though
the use of Death and Hades in this formula is not unusual, the inclusion
of the sea is unique to Revelation. 31
Bauckham's conclusion regarding Rev 20:13 is that John associates the
sea with Hades due to an already-established link between this region and
the abyss. 32 Revelation 20:13 thus provides further evidence for John's
negative conception of the sea and its association with the abyss as region
of the dead. 33 The lack of prior precedent for including the sea in this
scheme suggests, however, that while the destruction of death and Hades
in the lake of fire at 20:14 may well leave readers waiting for the end of the
sea in 21:1, 34 it is still necessary to use the clues from elsewhere in Revela­
tion to determine why John has linked the sea with death and Hades in the
first place.
What conclusions can be drawn from this survey of Revelation's use of sea
imagery? It is not clear that any single use of sea imagery earlier in the book
is determinative for the interpretation of Rev 21:1c, but the recurrent
themes and images that emerge are indispensable for shaping readers' per­
ceptions and expectations, θάλασσα can be used in Revelation to denote
the realm of cosmic evil, sometimes linked with the abyss and death, and
it is regularly associated with God's judgements. The sea can also be one
integral part of creation which glorifies God along with heaven and earth,
but neither heaven nor earth are so closely linked elsewhere within John's
symbolic universe to evil and judgement. The significance of this portrait
for understanding 21:1 will be explored further below, but it first remains
to consider more precisely the possible background for the notion that the
sea might be excluded from the new creation.
In biblical literature, reflection on the stories of creation, flood, and exo­
dus, mingled perhaps at times with the general ancient Near Eastern con­
ception of the sea as adversary of the deity, gives rise to several passages in
which the sea is rebuked or dried up. Such descriptions can be related to
theophanies (e.g., Nah 1:4; Hab 3:8-15; cf. 4Ezra 8:23), be simply hyper­
bolic depictions of drought (e.g., Joel 1:20) or represent God's judgement
of Israel or the nations. 35
Amos, to take one example, describes a fire from the Lord that "con-
sumed the great deep and was consuming the portion [of land]" (7:4).
Interpreters as far back as Augustine have suggested that an analogous sce-
nario could be at work in Rev 21:1, such that the sea disappears simply
because it has been burned up in the fire of judgement. 36 But despite the
preponderance of fire imagery in Revelation, fire does not appear in chap-
ters 19-22 except in descriptions of the "lake of fire". Such a fire without a
corresponding new creation could also be expected to leave the earth
burned up as well, and yet here we have a new earth with no sea.
There are similar potential parallels in Sib. Or. 5.155-160,447-448; As.
Mos. 10:6; T. Levi 4:1; znàApoc. El. (C) 5:7,14, of which ^ . Mos. 10 come
closest perhaps to the context of Rev 21. Here the author describes the
appearing of God's kingdom throughout all creation, such that "Satan shall
be no more, and sorrow shall depart with him" (10:1); later in the passage
it is said that "the sea all the way to the abyss will retire" and "the rivers will
vanish away" (10:6). This description of sea and rivers, however, is set in a
context not of describing the nature of God's kingdom but in the theoph-
any that precedes its establishment, when on the day of the Lord his wrath
and judgement results not only in the retiring of the sea but in such things
as the shaking of the earth and the turning of the moon to blood (10:4-5).
This is the fundamental difference between Rev 21 and all such regu-
larly-cited parallels. While these texts reveal a common stream of tradition
that John may indeed be drawing on, the removal of the sea in Revelation
is made parallel not to other judgements but to other blessings. The end of
the sea cannot be construed as a further punishment of humankind or
even of evil nations, but rather its absence is an integral part of what makes
the new creation a place of joy, without evil, death, pain or sorrow. 37
Possibly nearer the context of Rev 21 are several passages in Isaiah that link
the rebuke or removal of the sea to a future exodus that is foreseen for
God's people. Thus Isa 10:26 describes the return of a remnant of Israel
when the Lord lifts up the sea in the same way he did in Egypt, and
Isa 11:15-16 claims the Lord will destroy the "tongue of the Sea of Egypt"
and split "the river" to make a way for the people to cross over, "just as
there was for Israel in the day that they came up from the land of Egypt".
Zechariah 10:11 similarly describes a time when the Lord "will pass
through the sea of distress and strike the waves of the sea and all the deeps
of the Nile will dry up".
The greatest development of this theme is found in Isa 43:16-21 and
Isa 51:9-11, passages that may be particularly relevant for Revelation.
John's description of a new heaven and earth in Rev 21:1-4 is modeled
largely on Isa 65:17-19, but Isa 43:16-21 seems to have influenced his
language as well, perhaps via the parallel reference to the "former things"
(ΓΜΦκη; LXX τα πρώτα) at both 43:18 and 65:17. The Lord's declaration
in 43:19, "behold I am making a new thing" (ΠΙΖΠΠ 7WV ΉΠ; LXX ιδού
ποιώ καινά), is in any case echoed at Rev 21:5, where the one sitting on the
throne declares, ιδού καινά ποιώ πάντα. The reference in Isa 43:20 to the
Lord's giving his people water to drink may also lie behind the reference in
Rev 21:6 to the one on the throne saying that he will give to the one who
is thirsty to drink from the spring of the water of life.
Such parallels suggest that John may intend to echo Isaiah's new exodus
in his depiction of the new creation. Readers will have been prepared for
such an interpretation by the regular use of exodus imagery earlier in the
book, at one point (as we have seen), explicitly in reference to the sea
(15:2). 38 This returns us to Isa 51:9-11, where the future deliverance is
described in terms very similar to Isa 43:16-21 and where sea imagery also
becomes predominant. The events of the exodus are linked here to events
39
usually associated with creation, and both paradigmatic actions of God
are taken up and applied to the future restoration. This restoration is
described in ways echoed elsewhere in Isaiah; verse 11 in fact replicates
exactly Isa 35:10, and the claim in both passages that "sorrow and sighing
shall flee away" is taken up again in John's primary source text, Isa 65:19,
where it said that in the New Jerusalem there shall no longer be heard "the
sound of weeping or the sound of crying".
If, as seems likely for Isa 43:16-21 and possible for Isa 51:9-11, these
passages have influenced Rev 21:l-5, 40 it may be that the removal of the
sea in Rev 21:1 should be interpreted in their light. If so, John is drawing
on the connection between creation, exodus and new creation already
present in Isaiah and is suggesting in Rev 21:1 that a new and final return
from exile has been completed for the people of God. Mathewson has
argued at length for this interpretation of Rev 21:1, 41 and the presence of
this motif is highlighted already in the commentaries of Ford and Beale. 42
The use of an exodus framework would cohere well with the emphases
in Rev 21 on the establishment of the Lord's sanctuary and the redemption
of his people, and the role that the sea plays within this scenario is consis-
tent with how sea imagery functions elsewhere in Revelation. The sea
through which the Israelites passed and which God used to judge their
enemies was already associated in biblical and early Jewish literature with
the cosmic abyss, the realm of evil monsters and spirits and the chaotic
powers that had been restrained at creation. Commentators on Rev 21:1
regularly mention these associations, though usually without reference to
the exodus. Even those few who cite the importance of exodus motifs,
however, neglect a central aspect of the image's significance: the sea is pre-
eminently that part of the cosmos that God is seen to use in judging the
world and its inhabitants. Although the nineteenth-century commentator
Hengstenberg in other respects misread John's use of sea imagery, he was
correct when he described the sea in Revelation as the "embodiment of
God's judgements". 43 We have seen that this theme is emphasised in Rev­
elation, and it has a long pedigree in biblical and apocalyptic literature,
from the flood of Noah's day to the future judgement of Rome as the new
Babylon. The exodus itself represented not only the Lord making a way
through the sea for his people but his using its waters to drown their pur­
suers. In Rev 21:1, John's readers have reached the end of the long series of
judgements that comprise the bulk of the book; the absence of the sea is
not a further judgement but rather represents the end of judgement itself.
Exodus typology goes some way towards explaining the cryptic reference
in Rev 21:1c. The second-exodus motif itself, however, is situated within a
larger, overarching framework that not only encompasses all the various
threads we have been tracing so far but also better illuminates the full
significance of 21:1c. The description of the new creation in Revelation
may draw its biblical impetus primarily from Isaiah, Ezekiel, and, to a
lesser extent, Zechariah, but it does not seem that John can describe the
creation of a heaven and earth without also reflecting on Genesis. This
becomes most evident in the description of the tree of life and its fruit in
Rev 22:2, where not only Ezek 47:1-12 but Gen 2 is clearly in the back­
ground. 44 It may also be that the first and seventh items that are listed as
absent from the new heaven and earth reveal the influence of scripture's
first creation story on its last.
Of the seven items John lists, the middle five can in biblical tradition
be related ultimately to the effects of the curse and the expulsion from
Eden described in Gen 3: death, mourning, crying pain, and—echoing
45
Zech 14:ll, but with Gen 3:17 also looming in the background—παν
κατάθεμα {everything cursed). 46 The two that bookend the list, θάλασσα
and νύξ, are the most enigmatic. But they share an association with judge­
ment and, more fundamentally, they are representative of the pre-creation
state of the world in Gen 1:2, when "darkness was upon the face of the
abyss, and the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters".
As with the sea, the darkness of night can be either a natural part of the
47
created order or be a sign of judgement. The interruption of cosmic light
sources is a common depiction of judgement in early Judaism, and this
48
motif is in fact used at several instances in Revelation. Jeremiah 4:23 is
particularly illuminating, as the occurrence of darkness in the context of
judgment is linked to the irruption of chaos in the created order and the
world's retreat to pre-creation conditions: "I looked on the earth and,
behold, it was 1ΓΠ1 1ΠΠ, and to the heavens and their light was not there".
Jeremiah sees the mountains quake, the land devastated and uninhabited
and the heavens darkened (4:24-28). The world is being de-created, return­
ing to its state when, as 4 Ezra 6:39 has it, "darkness and silence embraced
everything".
The removal of the sea and night could serve together simply to repre­
sent the end of judgement. But in the context of an act of new creation, it
seems likely that John is echoing not only the association of sea and dark­
ness with judgement but with the two pre-creation elements of Gen 1:2.
Waters and darkness show up as the two primordial elements in a number
of ancient cosmogonies, 49 and, for those working within the biblical tradi­
tion, the waters and the darkness could represent the potential for disorder
and chaos and even hint at the possibility that evil might spring up in an
otherwise good creation.
The fact that there is no more sea or night in the new heaven and new
earth suggests an allusion to the first creation since in both instances these
elements are in some way subjugated, divided or restrained; but Endzeit is
not simply Urzeit for John, for in his vision of the complete elimination of
the sea and night, creation has been brought beyond any threat of future
evil, chaos or judgement. It is as if the first creation, while good in itself,
had had the potential to develop in two directions: if humankind fulfilled
its role and lived in harmony with God and the rest of creation, the latent
powers of chaos represented especially by the sea and darkness would be
forever within the scope of human dominion and would become perhaps
sources of creative energy and delight—just as they were for God, for
whom even Leviathan could be a plaything. But if the covenant between
God and his creatures was broken and human beings allied themselves
with the serpent and its realm, the forces of chaos would be let loose and
the sea become a thing of terror, an abode of evil and an instrument of
judgement. Scripture may be largely a record of humankind opting for this
latter path, but John's intent is to assure the churches that they have not
therefore been abandoned to a world of sorrow, pain and mourning.
Instead, the triumph of the "Lamb that was slain" means that the creator's
fidelity to his creation—hinted at in the rainbow around the throne, sign
of the Noahic covenant—is expressed finally through nothing less than the
renewal of the cosmos, an event in which the world is brought beyond any
threat of future rebellion or sin.
By describing the new creation in terms that echo the first, John high-
lights what is different about the new creation. He suggests that the cosmic
sea, the waters of which could be set loose during this age to bring destruc-
tion and from which beasts and evil powers might arise, will no longer
pose any threat in the renewed cosmos. Never again will creation be called
upon to destroy the destroyers of the earth for all judgment will be past
and salvation finally and definitively accomplished. 50