In a recent essay Kenneth L. Cukrowski discusses and compares two pos­
sible ways to supply the ellipsis in 1 Tim 2:9.* One possibility is to add
βούλομαι only, as suggested by a number of scholars, 2 and understand v. 9
as merely referring to the way women should adorn. The other is to supply
βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι, a reading that would clearly specify that women
are expected to pray. 3 Other authors leave the question open, 4 or do not
address the matter directly, but their interpretation implies a certain
understanding. 5 This evidence apparently suggests that there are two major
camps adopting opposite positions, but as a matter of fact the issue is
much more complex. Many of those who supply only βούλομαι explicitly
or implicitly indicate that they understand w. 9-10 as a reference to women
praying in public worship. 6 It seems then that there is no clear-cut distinc­
tion between two factions, one asserting and the other denying that women
are to pray, since only very few authors take w. 9-10 to be merely part of a
household code. Cukrowski himself pleads for βούλομαι, pointing to
seemingly insolvable grammatical difficulties when reading βούλομαι
προσεύχεσθαι.
In this essay three issues will be addressed. First, it will be argued that a
text-critical analysis allows for both options to supply the ellipsis, and
an explanation will be suggested for this ambiguity. Second, building on
the possibility to read βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι in v. 9, in an intertextual
analysis, 1 Tim 2:8-10 will be compared with 1 Cor 11:4-15 (more par­
ticularly w. 4-5, 7a). Third, it will be shown that the ambiguous character
of w. 9-10 derives not only from a merger of two different genres, but
results from a decision by 1 Tim to provide a relecture of the pre-text in 1
Cor 11 and to offer a correction of Paul by "Paul".
Cukrowski offers two possible reconstructions and readings of w. 8-10:
1.
Βούλομαι οΰν προσεύχεσθαι τους άνδρας
έν παντί τόπω
έπαίροντας όσιους χείρας
χωρίς όργης καί διαλογισμών.
ωσαύτως [βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι] γυναίκας
έν καταστολή κοσμίω μετά αιδοΰς
και σωφροσύνης κοσμείν έαυτάς,
μη έν πλέγμασιν και χρυσίω ή μαργαρίταις ή Ιματισμφ πολυτελεΐ,
αλλ' δ πρέπει γυναιξίν έπαγγελλομέναις θεοσέβειαν, δι' έργων αγαθών.
2.
Βούλομαι ούν προσεύχεσθαι τους άνδρας
έν παντι τόπφ
έπαίροντας όσιους
χείρας χωρίς όργης και διαλογισμών.
ωσαύτως [βούλομαι] γυναίκας
έν καταστολή κοσμίφ μετά αιδοΰς και σωφροσύνης
κοσμειν έαυτάς,
μη έν πλέγμασιν και χρυσίω ή μαργαρίταις ή ίματισμφ πολυτελεΐ,
αλλ' δ πρέπει γυναιξίν έπαγγελλομέναις θεοσέβειαν, δι' έργων αγαθών.
This text differs from NA 2 7 in two instances. Cukrowski does not explain
his reason for replacing διαλογισμού in v. 8 with διαλογισμών. A decision
is not easy, as the manuscript evidence is divided. 7 J.K. Elliott argues that
the singular results from a harmonisation with όργης. 8 But a change to the
plural is equally possible. I.H. Marshall cites evidence for the use of the
singular from the ethical lists in Col 3:8; Eph 4:31 f. 9 In the NT, διαλογισμός
is mostly used in the plural (eleven out of fourteen instances). The excep­
tions are 1 Tim 2:8 and Luke 9:46, 47 (par. Mk 9:33 διαλογίζομαι), but
in the latter the choice of the singular may have been influenced by the fact
that one issue, and only one, is at stake: το τίς αν εΐη μείζων αυτών (con­
trast the double question in Luke 5:21 and the plural διαλογισμοί in v. 22).
The frequency of the plural would rather indicate a harmonisation in that
direction, and the text is well attested.
In v. 9 Cukrowski drops καί before γυναίκας (introduced in square
brackets in NA 26 " 27 , against NA 2 5 ), which he thinks was added merely
to smooth the syntax. 10 The conjunction is missing in a number of
witnesses. 11 This reading was generally preferred by the older editions up
to NA 25 (T, H, S, V, M, B), on the authority of K*A. However Κ has a
tendency to omit καί, and in general scribes were inclined to drop καί, for
stylistic reasons, as Elliott remarks. 12 The word may also have dropped out
by mere parablepsis (QCAYTQCKAIGYNAIKAC). Καί is supported by
an important number of witnesses, both on its own and followed by τάς 13
(καί τάς also supports καί). Elliott may be right that the combination of
ωσαύτως with καί was likely to be original, because scribes would rather
have dropped καί than added it after ωσαύτως. 14 The Pastoral Epistles
(PE) combine instances of ωσαύτως with arthrous and with anarthrous
nouns. 15 The noun is usually in pre-position, except in 1 Tim 2:9 and
5:25. In v. 9 the article was probably added to harmonise with v. 8 (τους
άνδρας). Even if τάς is secondary, there are obvious arguments in favour
of καί that should be considered. Καί following ωσαύτως is additionally
reinforcing the parallelism between w. 8 and 9.
1. When supplying βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι a close parallel is estab­
lished between the way men and women ought to pray, reinforcing the
effect of ωσαύτως. In this case γυναίκας is the subject of the infinitive
προσεύχεσθαι. The prepositional phrase έν καταστολή κοσμίφ μετά αίδοΰς
functions adverbially and parallels the analogous έν παντί τόπφ in v. 8. Cuk-
rowski suggests that this reconstruction can work only if both infinitives,
προσεύχεσθαι and κοσμειν, depend on βούλομαι and are connected by καί.
Therefore μετά αιδοΰς has to be disconnected from σωφροσύνης and linked
to έν καταστολή κοσμίφ. 16 As a result, μετά αίδοΰς further specifies the
attire ("in modest attire with modesty"), while σωφροσύνης would explain
κοσμειν. Cukrowski rightly concludes that the first option as he presents it
does not stand, for the modifier of κοσμειν has to take the dative, not the
genitive. 17 In addition, one would have to break up the phrase μετά αίδοΰς
καΐ σωφροσύνης that naturally holds together. A few witnesses have
inverted the order, nonetheless indicating that the two nouns were clearly
understood as belonging together. 18 The close association of these concepts
is attested in ancient authors. 19
Since the grammatical inappropriateness of this construction overweighs
its strength in terms of thematic coherence, Cukrowski is right that the
first option, as he presents it, does not work.
2. If only βούλομαι is supplied, γυναίκας is the subject of κοσμειν, that
is further defined by the adverbial construction έν καταστολή κοσμίφ μετά
αίδοΰς καΐ σωφροσύνης. The clause describes the way women should
adorn themselves.
Cukrowski now seems to disconnect οσίους from χείρας in v. 8, and
connect it to άνδρας. 20 If not a mere mistake of layout, this presentation
probably results from erroneously taking οσίους to be an accusative plural
masculine. For the same reason some manuscripts have substituted όσίας,
but in the Hellenistic declension οσίους can also denote the accusative
plural feminine. 21 Apart from that, disconnecting έπαίροντας οσίους
from χείρας does not make much sense, since "lifting up hands" is a widely
attested gesture of prayer, described by the almost formulaic οσίους
χείρας. 22 Men are expected "to lift up their hands", i.e. to pray, in a manner
that is characterised positively by holiness and negatively by the absence of
23
anger and disputes (or doubts).
Κοσμειν in v. 9 becomes the equivalent of προσεύχεσθαι in v. 8, thus
prayer is excluded. The proposal provides both a verbal (βούλομαι), and a
formal parallel between w. 8 and 9. Moreover, the construction is gram­
24
matically correct. Cukrowski concludes that this reading should be pre­
ferred, although it eliminates 1 Tim 2:9 from the list of instances referring
to women praying, and could therefore be judged as a difficulty by "those
25
who desire a passage that explicitly mentions women praying."
The present essay is not motivated by the desire to save 1 Tim 2:9 for
such a list. However, this second proposal of Cukrowski is itself not with­
out difficulties. The main problem with this reading is that it skips quite
abruptly from the motif of prayer in v. 8 to that of women's attire in v. 9.
Cukrowski answers the objection by pointing out that the reconstruction
offers a coherent reading of 2:1-15, where prayer is introduced in w. 1-2,
and the repetition of the topic in v. 8 functions as a link "to a specific treat­
ment of problems in worship." 26 But with such an argument Cukrowski
makes worship the unifying theme of the pericope, and so in a way comes
close to those who think that βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι should be supplied
in v. 9. Moreover, there are other ways to supply the ellipsis. We will argue
that it is possible to supply βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι and still preserve a
grammatically correct structure.
Anyway, the analysis of the two reconstructions proposed by Cukrowski
indicates that the text seems to require from the reader to choose between
grammatical or thematic coherence. Cukrowski has opted for the first. Even
so his decision is not without difficulties. Both his reconstructions imply an
artificial division of the clauses (disconnecting μετά αίδοΰς from σωφροσύνης
in the first, and detaching οσίους from χείρας in the second reading).
It is important to note that the passage is intrinsically ambiguous. The
most probable explanation is that the text resulted from the merger of ele­
ments belonging to different genres, as will be explained below. This results
in the difficulty to ascertain at once absolute grammatical and thematic
consistency. 27
The possibilities for supplying the ellipsis are not exhausted by Cukrowski s
two proposals. In the following, two other suggestions are presented, before
returning once more to the option supplying βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι.
It is clear that the requirements addressed to men and women are analo­
gously structured, but they are not identical, and are more elaborately for­
mulated in v. 9. The requests addressed to women are further expanded
with other exhortations (to preserve silence, to be submitted) and prohibi­
tions (to teach and exert authority over men). Women are reminded of their
inferiority in creation and their fallacious nature, and they are promised
salvation by childbearing. All these manifold requirements and prohibi­
tions have no counterpart in the exhortation addressed to men. The most
likely explanation of this unbalance (apart from possible ideological rea­
sons) is the fact that w . 8-9 (±10) contain a cultic rule 28 largely expanded
with material reflecting the catalogues of virtues incorporated in the "sta­
tion code" tradition 2 9 and in Neo-Pythagorean exhortations to women. 3 0
On the hypothesis of a composite text some authors, while asserting
that the ellipsis should be supplied with βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι, have
recurred to a more radical way of dealing with the passage. E. Hautsch
remarked that v. 9 in its present form is incomprehensible because of
31
κοσμειν (έαυτάς). In his analysis of the church regulations ("Kirchen-
ordnungen") of the PE, H.H. Mayer, taking up Hautsch, understands
w. 9-10 as referring to women praying, and agrees that the main difficulty
of the text arises from κοσμειν έαυτάς. 32 Vv. 8-9 refer to a cultic rule in
which v. 9 deals with the attitude of praying women, and κοσμειν has to be
dismissed as a secondary expansion. Mayer suggests the following reading:
ωσαύτως [βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι] και γυναίκας εν καταστολή κοσμίφ μετά
αιδοΰς και σωφροσύνης, [κοσμειν έαυτάς] μη έν πλέγμασιν και χρυσίω ή
μαργαρίταις ή ιματισμφ πολυτελεΐ, αλλ' δ πρέπει γυναιξίν έπαγγελλομέναις
θεοσέβειαν, δι' έργων αγαθών. 33
Mayer is followed by H.-W. Bartsch, who regards κοσμειν έαυτάς as an
addition by the author, modifying the cultic rule. The text reflects a later
stage in the elaboration of church regulations. 34
This reading is largely based on Origen, who in his Περί ευχής inter­
preted 1 Tim 2:9-10 as referring to the manner in which women should
pray. After commenting on v. 8, he goes on stating,
προς τούτοις την γυναίκα χρή εχειν μάλιστα εύχομένην το κατεσταλμένον καΐ το
κόσμιον ψυχή και σώματι, πάντων μάλλον έξαιρέτως και δτε εύχεται αιδουμένην
τον θέον καΐ πάσαν άκόλαστον καΐ γυναίκειαν ύπόμνησιν έξορίσασαν από του
ηγεμονικού και κεκοσμημένην ουκ "έν πλέγμασι και χρυσφ ή μαργαρίταις ή
ίματισμω πολυτελεΐ", άλλ' οΐς πρέπον εστί κεκοσμήσθαι γυναίκα θεοσέβειαν
έπαγγελλομένην [...], ως έδίδαξεν έν τη αύτη επιστολή ό Παύλος λέγων: "γυναίκας
ωσαύτως έν καταστολή κοσμιώς (κοσμίφ) μετά αίδούς και σωφροσύνης κοσμειν
έαυτάς, μη εν πλέγμασι και χρυσφ ή μαργαρίταις ή ίματισμφ πολυτελει, αλλ' δ
πρέπει γυναιξίν έπαγγελλομέναις θεοσέβειαν, δι' έργων αγαθών." 35
Origen interprets καταστολή as demeanour, not attire, and connects μετά
αίδοΰς (και σωφροσύνης) to women's deportment. Thus the first part of 1
Tim 2:9-10 refers to attitude, 36 and only the subsequent part to the out­
ward manifestation of their inward disposition.
The reconstruction proposed by Hautsch, Mayer and Bartsch is in a way
a source-critical decision, as it is based on the hypothesis that the text com­
bines two different types of tradition. It is an attempt to explain the ambi­
guity of v. 9, as well as the obvious thematic discordance between v. 8 and
w. 9b-12,15b. Additionally, it solves the syntactic-grammatical difficulties
of v. 9 and the question about the verb to which the adverbial phrases
should be related. The fact that this reconstruction is based on a conjecture
is a major difficulty. Nonetheless, Mayer and Bartsch are right about the
heterogeneous character of w. 9-15, which combine a general rule con­
cerning women's demeanour and a cultic rule, a hypothesis taken over by
other scholars as well. 37
A different option to supply the ellipsis was suggested already by Chrysos-
tom. He understood ωσαύτως as referring to the whole clause of v. 8. Thus
he reads: ωσαύτως και τας γυναίκας βούλομαι, φησί, Θεφ προσιέναι,
χωρίς όργης, χωρίς διαλογισμού, οσίους χείρας εχειν. 38
This proposal was adopted by modern scholars as well. In their transla­
tion, Quinn and Wacker explicitly supply only βούλομαι ("I also wish
them to be attractive / to make themselves attractive"), but they clearly
understand the text as a reference to prayer, when stating that women "are
to pray in precisely the way that the men have just been directed to [...].
Accordingly they as much as the men were obliged to participate in the
Christian liturgy, to raise their holy hands in prayer, [...] to quench per­
39
sonal anger and quarrelsomeness".
This solution is not implausible. It is supported by the otherwise enig­
matic έν παντί τόπω, which most likely refers to all worship places in any
40
local community (household church), indicating that the subsequent
clauses describe attitudes at prayer, in general, in agreement with the uni­
versal perspective in w. 1-2. 41 Bartsch thinks that this often overlooked
clause is meant to strengthen the cultic rule. 42
The question is whether one should supply the whole subordinate clause
from v. 8 or only its first part (έν παντί τόπφ έπαίροντας οσίους χείρας). If
one opts for the first possibility, w. 9 (έν καταστολή κτλ.) and 10 do not
have a counterpart in v. 8 and the structure is very unbalanced. In the
second option, part of the requirements are gender-specific: men are
expected to refrain from anger and debates, women from excessive
beautification. 43 This option may be the more likely, for reasons of compo­
sition (balanced structure) and of content. This could mean an expansion
of the cultic rule with χωρίς όργης κτλ. in v. 8, and έν καταστολή κτλ. in
v. 9, both stemming from a station code tradition.
The two previous solutions offer valuable insights which deserve attention.
The first points to the merger of sources and genres, the second offers a
reasonable interpretation of the parallel. However, they also create their
own difficulties (the conjecture and the unbalanced structure). Therefore
two other readings are presented here, that may be regarded as variants of
the same structure. There is no need to alter the text, and in both prayer is
implied.
Βούλομαι ούν προσεύχεσθαι τους άνδρας
εν παντί τόπφ
έπαίροντας όσιους χείρας
χωρίς όργης και διαλογισμού.
ωσαύτως [βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι] [και] γυναίκας
εν καταστολή κοσμίφ
μετά αίδοΰς και σωφροσύνης κοσμειν έαυτάς,
μη έν πλέγμασιν καί χρυσίφ ή μαργαρίταις ή ιματισμφ πολυτελεΐ,
άλλ' ο πρέπει γυναιξιν έπαγγελλομέναις θεοσέβειαν, δι έργων αγαθών.
This reading reveals a number of quite remarkable similarities between
w. 8 and 9-10 in terms of structure and thematic thrust. Both parts deal
with instructions concerning the way in which men and women should
pray. In both a prepositional phrase in the dative (έν παντί τόπφ / έν
καταστολή κοσμίφ) defines a general condition. There follow more con­
crete requirements about the manner of praying, detailed in a positive
(έπαίροντας οσίους χείρας / μετά αίδοΰς καί σωφροσύνης κοσμειν έαυτάς)
and in a negative way (χωρίς όργης καί διαλογισμού / μη έν πλέγμασιν καί
χρυσίφ ή μαργαρίταις ή ιματισμφ πολυτελει).
The two parts are not absolutely parallel of course. A participle is used
in v. 8 (έπαίροντας) and an infinitive in v. 9 (κοσμειν). Though formally
corresponding to έν παντί τόπφ, έν καταστολή κοσμίφ does not have
exactly the same function, since it qualifies the manner of praying, while
έν παντί τόπφ either defines the location or emphasises the general character
of the rule. (Yet this difference is not removed by supplying merely
βούλομαι). Subsequently, έπαίροντας refers to προσεύχεσθαι directly,
while μετά αίδοΰς κτλ. does so only indirectly, as a further qualification
of έν καταστολή κοσμίφ. The qualification is expressed with an adjective
in v. 8 (όσίος), and with two substantives functioning adverbially in v. 9
(μετά αίδοΰς καί σωφροσύνης). The negative clauses apparently have a
different object, rebuking inward attitude in men and outward appearance
in women. But the latter is criticised precisely as an expression of an inner,
morally wrong attitude. The negative clause in v. 9 (μη έν κτλ.) is obviously
much more elaborate (four types of adornment are listed) than its counterpart
in v. 8 (χωρίς with double qualification). But the list of four qualifications
in v. 9 could also be read as a sort of double qualification connected by καί
(referring to hairdo and adornment), of which the second part is further
elaborated into a triplet (with double ή). The admonition to men has a
close parallel in Phil 2:14 (χωρίς γογγυσμών καί διαλογισμών) 44 and can
also be compared to 1 Tim 5:21 (χωρίς προκρίματος μηδέν... πρόσκλισιν).
The final clause in v. 10 has no counterpart in v. 8, but represents the nec­
essary complement in a μη... αλλά construction.
Thus the requirements are formulated differently, but they take a similar
place in the overall structure of the passage, and in both cases one finds an
association between outward gesture and inward disposition.
Alternatively, μετά αίδοΰς καί σωφροσύνης and κοσμειν έαυτάς could
also be taken with έν καταστολή κοσμίφ and with μη èv πλέγμασιν κτλ.
respectively:
Βούλομαι ουν προσεύχεσθαι τους άνδρας
έν παντι τόπφ
έπαίροντας όσιους χείρας
χωρίς όργης και διαλογισμού.
ωσαύτως [βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι] [καί] γυναίκας
έν καταστολή κοσμίφ μετά αίδοΰς καί σωφροσύνης
κοσμειν έαυτάς μη έν πλέγμασιν και χρυσίω ή μαργαρίταις ή ίματισμφ
πολυτελεΐ,
άλλ' δ πρέπει γυναιξίν έπαγγελλομέναις θεοσέβειαν, δι' έργων αγαθών.
This reading differs from the previous one in only one issue, the position
of μετά αίδοΰς καί σωφροσύνης with respect to κοσμειν έαυτάς. But the
function of this latter phrase remains the same. In both readings κοσμειν
functions as an epexegetical infinitive, explaining the prepositional phrase
έν καταστολή κοσμίφ κτλ., 45 either in an outright positive (μετά αίδοΰς
KGC! σωφροσύνης) or in a positive and a negative way (as part of the μη...
αλλά clause). 46
Cukrowski argues that the reading with βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι can­
not work because it leaves the two infinitives disconnected. But this is not
the case: προσεύχεσθαι and κοσμειν are not on the same level. They do not
define two coordinate clauses, but belong to the main and the subordinate
clause, respectively, therefore they do not have to be connected by καί.
Many authors find a striking resemblance between 1 Tim 2:8-15 and
1 Cor 14:34-35, and with good reason. 47 Yet there are not many to offer
a detailed discussion of the similarities between 1 Tim 2:8-15 and
1 Cor 11:3-15. Some authors argue for a clear textual parallel, 48 or notice
the thematic similarities. 49 The function of 1 Cor ll:2ffas pre-text for
1 Tim 2:13 is discussed by A. Merz. However, her excellent intertextual
analysis deals with the prohibition of teaching and its legitimation from
creation and fall, and she does not focus primarily on 1 Cor ll:5-6. 50
Others establish various degrees of connection, but mostly reflect on the
common argumentation from Genesis. Nonetheless, the intertextual
approach shows that 1 Tim knew and used 1 Cor 11:3-15 and its co(n)text,
reinterpreting it in a restrictive manner. The evidence comes from the sim­
ilarities between the two texts and their co-text. There is an obvious the­
matic parallel between the two passages, reinforced by a number of verbal
connections. Thus both formulate rules regarding the way men and women
have to pray in the community, and they combine regulations referring to
prayer and outfit. Both legitimate the regulations with arguments from the
creation account(s) and from social conventions. Moreover, the immediate
context is very similarly structured and brings in a number of keywords
which will have an important function for the (re) interpretation carried on
by 1 Tim.
1 Cor 11 is part of a larger section dealing with public worship. The same
context is asserted by most commentators for 1 Tim 2:1-10(15). The latter
deliberately took over not only the topic of public prayer and regulations
concerning men and women, but also adopted and adapted a number of
concepts from the context, conveying a new meaning to the pre-text. A look
at the co(n)text is highly important, as it reveals additional elements of inter-
textuality and points to the restrictive reinterpretation of Paul, with a refer­
ence to Paul s words, his name and his authority. This procedure is described
by A. Merz as "fictitious self-reference", and is meant to offer a relecture of
the pre-text and to eliminate other, competing interpretations of Paul. 52
In 1 Corinthians, the cultic rule in 11:4-7a is preceded by a discussion
on alimentary rules (10:25-30). In this context Paul makes his case calling
attention to three ideas: conscience (συνείδησις) is the governing author­
ity, unjust criticism should be rejected as βλασφημία, and his ministry
serves the universal salvation plan. Further, the cultic rule itself is intro-
duced by an assertion of Paul s apostolic authority. These four concepts
(συνείδησις, βλασφημία, Pauls role in the universal plan of salvation, and
his authority) immediately precede the cultic rule in 1 Tim 2 as well, there­
fore their meaning in 1 Cor needs to be discussed.
In 1 Cor 10 Paul argues that Christians should not have a troubled
conscience (μηδέν άνακρίνοντες δια την συνείδησιν, w. 25, 27), by con­
suming meat that might come from pagan sacrifices, nor by partaking in
53
meals with non-believers. The emphasis is on the freedom of conscience,
54
certainly without disregarding the need to prevent scandal. While being
aware of this requirement, Paul adds in v. 29b: ίνατί γαρ ή ελευθερία μου
κρίνεται υπό άλλης συνειδήσεως;. Although rules should govern worship
and every day life, these rules should leave space for personal freedom,
since conscience is the internal authority that in certain cases can overwrite
external rules. The idea of possessing an ability to make personal judge­
ments about what is right or wrong will be taken up again in 11:13 (εν
ύμιν αύτοις κρίνατε), and even the authoritative introduction of the cultic
rule in 11:3 implies a demand for personal consent (θέλω δέ ύμας είδέναι) , 5 5
Even if Paul makes authoritative assertions, and his appeal is rather theo­
retical, he invites his readers to think with him.
After asserting the freedom of conscience and the respect for others'
sensitivity, Paul rhetorically asks why is he vilified (τί βλασφημούμαι;)
when he partakes in such meals with thankfulness, i.e. implicitly without
being blamed by his conscience (v. 30). The question could be interpreted
as an appeal to abstinence for the sake of those who could be scandalised,
but it is more likely to stress freedom and rejection of this unjust denigra­
tion (βλασφημία), as suggested by the following verse ("whether you eat or
drink", not "whether you eat or do not eat", cf. also v. 25). Therefore,
although Paul pays attention to the conscience of the other, he qualifies the
criticism of (his / a Christians) freedom, which in certain cases might go
against the rules, as βλασφημία. 56
This discussion on rules, conscience and freedom is connected with the
thought of universal salvation, expressed by Pauls concern for the whole
church, reaching even towards the outsiders (w. 32-33). In this context,
Paul emphasises his personal, selfless example: he is a minister of salvation,
and his only concern is the benefit of all, for the sake of their salvation
(10:33: καθώς κάγώ πάντα πασιν αρέσκω μη ζητών το έμαυτοΰ σύμφορον,
άλλα το τών πολλών ΐνασωθώσιν). His example should be followed by the
community, just as Paul himself is an imitator of Christ (11:1).
This statement is followed by an assertion of Pauls authority, based
on the fact that he transmits the παραδόσις (11:1-2). This apostolic author­
ity allows Paul to formulate or reinterpret rules regulating the life of the
community.
It is noteworthy that the co-text of 1 Tim 2:8-10 takes up the same key-
concepts (συνείδησις, βλασφημέω, universal salvation, Pauls example and
authority), in the same chain of thought, but while changing their meaning.
Just before introducing the section on prayer in ch. 2, "Paul", in a
renewed empowering of "Timothy", 57 commands him to hold faith, in
accordance with what has been entrusted to him, and a good conscience
(άγαθη συνείδηση 1:19). Vv. 18-19 resume the commissioning articu­
lated in w. 3-5. 58 For the PE faith, basically understood as faithfulness to
the sound doctrine, finds its expression in attachment to a morally right
lifestyle and in proper religious practice, 59 whereas false teachers and their
adepts are deeply vicious. 60 Under these circumstances the intimate link
between faith and lifestyle, both assuring a good conscience, becomes
obvious. "Timothys" commissioning, strengthened by apostolic authority,
introduces the whole ecclesial rule in chs. 2-3 and confers a special weight
to the cultic order that follows immediately after. Moreover, in this con­
text, άγαθη συνείδησις is both a consequence and a sign of ones conform-
ity to doctrinal and community rules, not of ones freedom from any such
rules.
Interestingly enough βλασφημεω appears also in 1 Tim 1:20. Immedi­
ately after the reference to the good conscience, βλασφημεω characterises
the attitude of Hymenaeus and Alexander as persons who have rejected
good conscience (ην τίνες άπωσάμενοι, v. 19), and have made shipwreck
of their faith. If we take into account that αγαθή συνείδησις is both con­
sequence and sign of conformity to doctrinal and congregational rules,
these paradigmatic persons represent the opposite position ofthat described
in w. 18-19a, 61 i.e. non-adherence to sound doctrine and to the rules
which result from it. In 1 Cor Paul, as paradigmatic Christian, is right,
although he breaks the rules, and his conscience correctly approves his
decision to do so. Thus the criticism of his opponents about not holding
to the rules is an unjust accusation, qualified as βλασφημία. Conversely, in
1 Tim 1:20 those who break the rules are rightly accused of βλασφημία, and
their rejection of doctrinal and/or congregational rules means a rejection of
good conscience and implicitly of faith, with utmost dramatic consequences.
Subsequently the combined intertextual reference to Paul through συνείδησις
and βλασφημεω is meant to emphasise what could be regarded as the oppo­
site of 1 Cor 10:27-31, an appeal to strict adherence to doctrinal and com­
munity rules instead of freedom of conscience.
Further, in 2:1-7 "Paul" urges "Timothy" to make prayers for all men,
including the civil authorities, so that Christians may live a quiet and
peaceful life in godliness and propriety. This is good in the eyes of the sav­
iour God, who wishes the salvation of all men (τοΰτο καλόν και άπόδεκτον
ενώπιον του σωτηρος ημών θεοΰ, δς πάντας ανθρώπους θέλει σωθήναι και
εις έπίγνωσιν αληθείας έλθειν, w. 3-4). In 1 Tim the situation has changed.
Paul is no longer amongst them as a model to be imitated. The universal
perspective is preserved, but the emphasis is not on the imitation of Pauls
example, but on his paradigmatic character and his authority, received
from Christ himself (εις ο έτέθην εγώ κήρυξ και απόστολος, 2:7). The
commissioning of the apostle in v. 7 takes up again the longer version in
1:12-16 that strongly emphasises the paradigmatic nature of Pauls absolu­
tion and mission. Paul is not only the exemplary sinner who has found
mercy, but also the manifestation of Gods universal saving will, and this
confers him a particular authority. While in 1 Cor Paul can still offer him­
self as an example of selfless endeavour in the service of universal salvation,
in 1 Tim he becomes a paradigmatic presence. He has experienced God's
universal saving will. Subsequently he has become a herald of this saving
62
will that can be received in the έπίγνωσις αληθείας, and now his apos­
tolic authority is mediated by "Timothy".
One additional change should be noted. While Pauls universal concern,
expressed in 1 Cor 10:32-33, is motivated solely by his desire to be an
instrument of salvation, in 1 Tim 2:1-7 this concern (prayers for everyone)
is not only an expression of God s all-embracing saving will, but has the
clear purpose to secure the quiet, peaceful and godly life of the commu­
nity. This is a major concern for the PE, reflecting the ideal of "good citi­
zenship", in the perspective of a remote parousia. 
Both the cultic regulations in 1 Cor ll:4-7a and those in 1 Tim 2:8-10
are introduced by a clear statement on the speakers authority. Thus
1 Cor 11:3 relies on the preceding exhortation to follow the example of the
apostle (v. 1), and on the commendation of the community for having
preserved the tradition delivered to them by Paul (v. 2). This introductory
remark conveys a special weight to what follows. This reference is followed
by the authoritative θέλω. The κεφαλή argument serves as authoritative
introduction and fundament for the subsequent cultic rule.
The cultic rule in 1 Tim 2:8-10 in its turn relies on the authority of
the apostle, introduced in 1:18, where "Timothy" is entrusted with the
παραγγελία. 64 The apostolic authority is mentioned once again in 2:7:
"Paul" has been appointed herald, apostle and teacher of the nations,
directly by Christ (cf. w. 5-6). Moreover, Christ is described in his rela-
tionship to God, as sole mediator, therefore God is the source of Christ s
authority. Following this preamble, the cultic rule is introduced by the
powerful βούλομαι.
However, authority is conceived in a somewhat different manner.
1 Cor 11:3, 13 implies an invitation to think with Paul, a participation of
reason in the acknowledgment of the rules, which softens somewhat the
authoritative θέλω. 65 Moreover, Pauls authority is not absolute, but he
possesses it inasmuch as he is himself an imitator of Christ, and therefore
refers to Christ. 66 He is an element in the chain of transmission of what he
himself has received. Therefore his demands are authoritative insofar as
they are handed down to him (11:2, cf. 15:3). In 1 Tim Pauls authority is
immediate and complete: he has been directly appointed by Christ. The
language of power does not allow for reasoning or questions. M. Wolter
remarks that his authority derives from his quality of being the first to be
saved, and this priority makes him an archetype, not an example ("Urbild",
not "Vorbild"). 67
Both 1 Cor ll:4-7a 68 and 1 Tim 2:8-10 69 regulate the behaviour of men
and women at worship.
According to 1 Cor 1 l:4-7a worship involves not only prayer, but also
prophesying, for both men and women. The requirements are formulated
in a parallel manner (w. 4-5):
πας άνηρ προσευχόμενος ή προφητεύων
70
πάσα δε γυνή προσευχομένη ή προφητεύουσα.
In light of eh. 14, prophecy is a form of public, religious authoritative
71
speech. Prophecy is a gift that provides edification, encouragement
and comfort to others (ό προφητεύων άνθρώποις λαλεί οίκοδομήν και
παράκλησιν και παραμυθίαν, 3b). Moreover, prophecy edifies the church
(4b, cf. v. 5). Because compared to tongues prophecy is an intelligible,
edifying form of instruction, Paul states his preference: εν εκκλησία θέλω
πέντε λόγους τφ νοΐ μου λαλήσαι, ϊνα καί άλλους κατηχήσω (v. 19). 72 This
assertion proves not only the communitarian aspect of prophesying, but its
character of instruction as well (cf. also w. 26-31). This dimension of
teaching/instruction as an unambiguous function of prophecy is also
affirmed in 14:31, where Paul encourages all to prophecy: ίνα πάντες
μανθάνωσιν και πάντες παρακαλώνται. These considerations are impor­
tant for the way we read 1 Cor 11:4-5.
In 1 Cor 11 the issue is not praying or prophesying as such, but the way
one behaves in doing so. There is no consensus on what exactly Paul means
by κατακαλύπτω in v. 6, said of women, and κατά κεφαλής έχων 73 in v. 4
referring to men. According to a common interpretation women have to
be veiled. 74 Yet κάλυμμα does not appear in the text. Conversely, based on
the references to hair in w. 6.14-15, several authors think that the regula­
tion actually concerns hairdo, and that the main issue is rather that of
assuming gender roles, as suggested by the argument from nature in v. 14. 75
A number of early Christian readers supplied κατά κεφαλής έχων with
κόμη, 76 but nonetheless regarded the demand concerning women as refer­
ring to veiling. 77 Whatever the case may be, 78 it is obvious that public
prayer and prophesying, performed by both men and women, is connected
to requirements regarding an appropriate appearance.
In 1 Tim 2:8-10 men are explicitly instructed to pray with the appropri­
ate spiritual attitude. The discussion of the ellipsis has shown that the
demand addressed to women is more ambiguous. Nonetheless, supplying
βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι allows for interpreting w. 9-10 as referring to
women at prayer. Now only prayer is in view: prophesying is not men­
tioned. However, in w. 11-12 there is a reference to teaching as a form of
authoritative speech: women are exhorted to learn (μανθάνω) in full sub­
mission 79 and are forbidden to teach or exert authority over men. 80
When comparing the expectations in 1 Tim 2:8-10 with those in
1 Cor 1 l:4-7a, some key-words and themes from 1 Cor are repeated, but
in a noteworthy manner, implying omissions and expansions, as well as the
re-interpretation of the recurring themes. 81
Both texts address the issue of prayer in the context of public worship. Πας
άνηρ προσευχόμενος ή προφητεύων in 1 Cor 11:4 can be paralleled with
προσευχεσθαι τους άνδρας in 1 Tim 2:8. If προσεύχεσθαι is supplied in
1 Tim 2:9, the reading parallels πάσα δε γυνή προσευχομένη ή προφητεύουσα
oflCorll:5. 8 2
An additional link between the two texts is created by the interconnec­
tion between prayer and the appropriate outward appearance at worship.
Some suggest that the phrase οσίους χείρας in 1 Tim 2:8 could also refer
to a symbolic physical purity. 83 Vv. 9-10 extensively discuss women's
appearance, with reference to respectable apparel and to the way they
should (not) wear their hair (μη εν πλέγμασιν). These motifs recall the
regulation regarding feminine (hair)wear in 1 Cor 11:5-6, 13, 15. Another
verbal and thematic link is realised by the requirement of a worthy manner
of adorning (δ πρέπει, 1 Tim 2:10), which corresponds to Paul's rhetorical
question in 1 Cor 11:13 (πρέπον εστίν;). 84 One could object that 1 Tim
2:10 refers only metaphorically to adornment, actually envisaging a moral
attitude, but w. 9b-10 clearly touch upon the manner of dressing. On the
other hand, both texts regulate the outward appearance as manifestation of
a morally fitting or inappropriate attitude.
A very strong link between the two texts is realised by the theological
legitimation of the cultic rule, a matter that will be addressed below (2.2.3).
Beside the clear thematic and verbal connections, there are obvious
differences as well. The most striking difference is the absence of prophecy.
In 1 Tim 2:8 men are no longer supposed to prophesy. Prophecy basically
disappears from the PE. 85 The cognate προφητείας appears twice in 1 Tim
(1:18; 4:14), in both cases in relation with "Timothys" institution/
"ordination" as successor of Paul and defender of the sound doctrine. (A
prophet appears once in the PE, in Tit 1:12, in a rather negative context).
This "institutionalisation" of prophecy goes together with the omission of
prophesying as a gift or attribution of regular members of the community,
let them be even men.
For women, what was still obvious for Paul in 1 Cor 11:5, 13, has
become either ambiguous (prayer), or inconceivable (prophecy) in 1 Tim 2.
Since 1 Cor 14:19, 31 describes prophecy as a form of authoritative speech
and instruction, which provides the possibility to learn (μανθάνω), it is
probable that the exhortation addressed to women to learn in silence, par­
alleled by the prohibition to teach or exercise authority over men in 1 Tim
2:11-12 is a fictitious self-reference and self-correction, excluding women
from any form of public authoritative speech and correcting Pauls permis­
sive attitude toward women prophesying.
A particular problem arises with respect to the subject of prophesying
and learning in 1 Cor 11 and 14, and the relationship of these texts with
1 Tim 2:11-12. In 1 Cor 11:5 it is obvious that women prophesy. Further,
according to 14:31, all are allowed to prophesy: they only need to respect
a certain order, so that everyone may learn and receive encouragement.
Hence there is an obvious reciprocity in both prophesying/instructing and
learning. This reciprocity is nonetheless denied in 14:34-35, expecting
women to keep silent. The latter text has striking semantic and thematic
similarities with 1 Tim 2:11-12 that have been explained in various ways. 86
Based on text- and literary-critical arguments and on the contrast to 1 Cor
11:5 and the rest of 1 Cor 14, a significant number of scholars regard w. 34-35
as an early interpolation, probably by the time when the Corpus Paulinum
87
was edited. A few defend their authenticity, either because no manuscript
omits these verses, the text-critical evidence for an interpolation being regarded
88
89
as unconvincing, or because of a certain understanding of inspiration.
The debate within scholarship regarding the authenticity and interpre­
tation of 1 Cor 14:34-35 shows not only the contradiction between this
text and 11:5, but also the fact that the scope of silencing is differently
understood. Those scholars who regard the verses as Pauline, but nonethe­
less perceive the tension with 11:5, tend to limit the prohibition to disre­
90
spectful intervention of Corinthian women during the service. Precisely
this choice to limit the interdiction to inconsiderate (small)talk, without
applying it to teaching/prophesying, indicates that the text could have
been liable from the beginning (even when an interpolation) to less restric­
tive interpretations. Thus one could assume that the author of 1 Tim has
attempted to interpret this text in a restrictive and unequivocal manner,
leaving no doubt about the full exclusion of women from public ministry
and teaching. 91 Yet other scholars who regard 1 Cor 14:34-35 as inauthen-
tic, based on the obvious verbal and thematic similarities with 1 Tim 2:9-15,
argue even that both texts could stem from the same or a similar patriar-
chal-misogynistic circle. 92
At any rate, 1 Tim 2:8-15 clearly narrows down the possibilities that are
still open in 1 Cor 11. This is particularly true for women, but to a certain
degree for men as well.
In 1 Cor 11:3-16 Paul legitimises the rules regulating male and female
appearance at public worship by the κεφαλή symbolism and by a double
reference to Gen in w. 7 and 9.
The meaning of his first argument (v. 3) is a matter of debate. A com­
mon interpretation of the κεφαλή metaphor asserts the subordination of
the woman. Nonetheless, a number of authors suggest that Paul simply
alludes to Gen 2, stating that the man is the source of the woman's exist­
ence. 93 Yet, even mere precedence in creation may suggest a hierarchical
relationship between man and woman.
A reference to the first account of creation appears in v. 7: the man is
not supposed to cover his head (or to wear long hair), because he is the
image and glory (είκών και δόξα) of God. This is not only an allusion to,
but also a reinterpretation of Gen 1:26-27, since in Paul the resemblance
to God is a male attribute.
The third argument (v. 9) draws from Gen 2. Paul reinforces the implicit
androcentrism of the account, emphasising that "man is not from (εκ)
woman, but woman from man; nor was man created for/through (δια)
woman, but woman for/through man" (w. 8-9). Nonetheless, his subse­
quent reflection seems to correct this one-sided perspective, as he goes on
stating the interdependence between man and woman, even in terms of
origin (11:11-12).
1 Tim 2:13 legitimates the restrictions regarding women's public role 94
by references to Gen 2-3. In 1 Tim 2 there is no mention anymore of the
woman being the mans δόξα. The chronological precedence of the man in
creation (Gen 2), understood as a sign of his superiority, becomes even
more categorical: the reciprocity-statement of 1 Cor 11:11-12 can no
longer be found in 1 Tim 2. 95 Additionally, submission and exclusion are
legitimised not only by the chronological order of creation, but also by a
reference to the Fall, in the interpretative line of Sir 25:24 and Philo (QG I).
The woman (not only Eve!) is allegedly liable to deception by nature. 96
Thus in 1 Tim 2 "Paul" makes use of another fictitious self-reference, in
order to severely restrict the public ministry of women, based on the order
of creation and on additional hamartiological arguments.
The rules regulating dressing and hairstyle were obviously part of a social
code, as proved by a vast number of ancient sources. 97 Dressing code and
rules regulating hairdo were related to gender roles, and implicitly to bio­
logical roles. 98 This interrelation is exemplified by Pauls argument from
nature in 1 Cor 11:14." The same kind of connection between social
expectations regarding feminine adornment and gender roles can be found
in 1 Tim 2:9-15 as well. The author not only offers a stereotyped descrip­
tion of the manner in which women are supposed to dress, but he also
asserts that the only acceptable role through which women can attain sal­
vation is childbearing.
The first part of the essay has shown that there are several ways for dealing
with 1 Tim 2:9. Κοσμειν έαυτάς may be deleted as a secondary expansion,
or the ellipsis can be supplied with the entire clause in v. 8, with βούλομαι
or with βούλομαι προσεύχεσθαι. The latter reading does not interfere with
the text, it can work grammatically, and it provides a thematic unity
between w. 8 and 9-10. Yet none of these solutions is without difficulties,
and the text is ambiguous. This ambiguity is due to a merger of literary
genres, and proves to be ideologically useful. As such it is likely to be inten­
tional, as indicated by the similarly equivocal 1 Tim 3:9. 100
The intertextual approach shows that 1 Timothy very likely used as a
pre-text the cultic rule found in 1 Cor 11, together with its broader con­
text. This rule addressed praying and prophesying men and women, and
articulated certain expectations regarding their appearance at worship.
The rule was given a theological (Gen 1:26-27; 2:21-23) and a social-
natural legitimation, based on gender roles. 1 Timothy amplifies Paul s one­
sided reading of Gen, eliminating the positive reference to Gen 1:26-27, as
well as Paul s concession on the interdependence between man and woman.
The author proposes a restrictive, "corrective" re-interpretation of 1 Cor
11:11-12. To the theological legitimation based on the priority of man in
creation 1 Timothy adds a hamartiological argument from Gen 3. More­
over, the relecture of Gen 3 is profoundly unilateral, making Eve the sole
responsible for the Fall, and extending this blame to all women.
Additionally the meaning of the catchwords taken from the context
(συνείδησις, βλασφημία, Pauls example and apostolic authority) is also
modified, in order to "correct" some Pauline ideas. Thus freedom of con­
science is replaced with perfect adherence to sound doctrine and strict
observance of the ecclesial rules, which guarantee a good conscience. "Paul"
becomes an absolute reference-point whose will is manifested in "Timothy" s
authority.
A second pre-text used in 1 Tim 2 is a combination of a station code
tradition and Neo-Pythagorean-like exhortations, based on popular philo­
sophical topoi regarding women and specific gender roles. These comprise
requirements about the modest, respectable attire and adorning with good
deeds instead of jewellery. Other topoi refer to typically feminine virtues,
such as αιδώς and σωφροσύνη, silence and subordination to man. 101
Through the expansion of the congregational context with the station code
tradition, 1 Timothy extends the scope of the restrictive rule to both the
role of women in the church and in Christian life in general.
Mens prayer is further regulated and prophecy is eliminated. A cha­
risma potentially given to everyone is replaced by the institutional ministry
that secures the orderly life of the community. This order is safeguarded by
"Timothy", who acts with "Paul" s authority. Prophecy has no place in the
cultic rule anymore, because authoritative instruction is no longer an attri­
bute of any Christian, not even of men, but of ordained office-holders.
Further, 1 Timothy not only omits prophesying in case of women, but
also obscures the reference to προσεύχομαι, opting for the more ambigu­
ous ωσαύτως [καί] γυναίκας. This ambiguity is enhanced by the combi­
nation of the cultic rule with the station code tradition. 102 While prophecy
is described by Paul as a form of instruction, of authoritative speech
(1 Cor 14:19, 31), open to women (11:5), 1 Timothy prohibits women to
teach or to exert authority over men. This prohibition, formulated in line
with 1 Cor 14:34-35, is a fictitious self-reference, which comes to "cor­
rect" 1 Cor 11:5. Implicitly, 1 Timothy also "corrects" the potentially
"misleading" Pauline assertion that all should learn (μανθάνω, 1 Cor 14:31).
Through another unmarked corrective fictitious self-reference "Paul" now
clearly states that women should not teach, but should learn (μανθάνω) in
all submissiveness.
Thus in 1 Timothy "Paul" reinterprets Paul, who had clearly endorsed
men to pray and to prophesy, i.e. publicly exercise authoritative speech,
and had manifested at least a tacit approval of women praying and proph­
esying. In 1 Tim 2:8-15, men are to pray, but they are no longer expected
to prophesy. Women are left in an ambiguous position: the formulation of
the requirements is vague enough to presume that they are or are not per­
mitted to pray in public. What is obvious is that they are certainly prohib­
ited from speaking with authority, and they are only expected to adopt the
traditional gender role of household management and childbearing.
The ellipsis in 1 Tim 2:9 is more than a grammatical nicety.