The soteriology of Matthew's Gospel continues to puzzle its interpreters. 1
Many studies have concluded that Matthew's soteriology stands at the
opposite end of the spectrum as compared to the apostle Paul. 2 Jesus'
demands to his disciples, his insistence on a higher righteousness, as well
as frequent warnings about judgment according to works are difficult to
read as the work of a Paulinist, to say the least. Recent studies have also
brought to light an inner tension in Matthews Gospel. On the one hand
stands Jesus' demanding teaching; on the other hand his readiness to show
mercy toward helpless petitioners. 3
In the following I will focus on the passage that may be seen to stand
the furthest removed from the apostle Paul, the judgment scene in Mat-
thew 25:31-46. Read in light of the rhetoric of the whole Gospel, I will
argue that this passage brings together Matthews emphases both on a
higher righteousness and on the helplessness of the disciples. I will argue
that the two groups in Matt 25:31-46 are distinguished not only by their
works, but also by their attitudes, and that their different attitudes explain
their different actions. The condemned are surprised at their judgment and
question the rationale for it, displaying a defiant, self-confident, and ulti-
mately self-righteous attitude. The vindicated are equally surprised. They
do not present any arguments in their own defense. The rationale for
their acquittal has to be explained to them by the judge. They stand at
the judgment in the same position as all the people who have been the
recipients of Jesus' miracles: unable to help themselves. The judgment
scene in Matt 25:31-46 thus brings the two aspects of Matthews soteriol-
ogy together and shows the connection between the faith of the helpless
and the works of the righteous.
Without ignoring the fundamental differences in their understanding
of concepts such as righteousness and judgment, I will argue, therefore,
that at their core, Pauline and Matthean theology share a basic under-
standing of the relationship between grace, faith, and works.
My argument for this interpretation of Matthew 25:31-46 is four-fold.
First, the attitudinal aspects of Matt 25:31-46 stand out by comparison
with similar judgment scenes in comparable literature. Second, the con­
nections with the Sermon on the Mount show the importance of a right
attitude as a presupposition for right action. Third, the judgment scene can
be read in light of the imitation of Jesus theme, a theme that Matt 11:28-30
connects with the invitation to come to Jesus as a needy person. Fourth,
Matthew repeatedly emphasizes how outward actions are the manifesta­
tions of inward attitudes, and in the parable of the workers in the vineyard
(20:1-16), the importance of the right attitude is brought out with refer­
ence to the eschatological reward. Therefore, a reading of Matt 25:31-46
in the literary context of Matthew's Gospel alerts the reader to the signifi­
cance of the attitudinal aspects that can be detected in the account. Before
concluding my article, I will discuss its implications for the identity of "all
the nations" (25:32) and "the least" (25:40, 45).
The works of kindness that serve as criteria for judgment in Matt 25:35-36
are: feeding the poor, giving drink to the thirsty, receiving the strangers,
clothing the naked, assisting the sick, and visiting those in prison. The
importance of these works is well attested in Jewish sources (Isa 58:7;
Ezek 18:7; Tob 1:17; 4:16; T.Jac. 2:23; 4 Ezra 2:20; 2 En. 9:1; 63:1; Sib.
Or. 2:89-104; b. Sabb. 127a; b. Sotah 14a; Tg. Ps.-J. Deut 34:6). Only the
virtue of visiting those in prison appears to be unique to the Christian
tradition. 4
Matthew's account stands out by revealing that acts of kindness towards
the least of his brothers have been acts of kindness towards the Son of Man
(25:40). This identification has antecedents in the Hebrew Bible, where
God himself identified with the poor and accepted works done to them as
5
if they were done to himself (Prov 19:17). What is new in Matt 25:40 is
that Jesus takes God's place in identifying with the poor. 6
This is not the only surprising twist in Matthew's story, however. In
Matthew's judgment scene, the judge is the one who presents the evidence
in favor of the acquittal of the righteous. Comparable judgment accounts
are well aware that acts of kindness are powerful arguments in the divine
judgment, and they describe how decisive they can be. But the works are
cited by the human beings themselves, when they are making their case for
acquittal.
In the lengthy confession in the Egyptian Book of the Dead, the dead
person denies wrongdoing on specific counts and goes on to cite good
deeds, including to feed the hungry, to give drink to the thirsty, and to
clothe the naked:
Behold I have come to you without falsehood of mine, without crime of mine, with-
out evil of mine, and there is no one who testifies against me, for I have done nothing
against him. I live on truth, I gulp down truth, I have done what men say and with
which the gods are pleased. I have propitiated God with what he desires; I have given
bread to the hungry; water to the thirsty, clothes to the naked and a boat to him who
is boatless, I have given god s offerings to the spirits. Save me, protect me, without you
making report against me in the Presence, for I am pure of mouth and pure of hands,
one to whom is said 'Twice welcome!' by those who see him, because I have heard that
great word which the noble dead spoke with the Cat in the House of Him whose
mouth gapes (Book of the Dead, spell 125). 7
The Book of the Dead dates to the second millennium BCE, but that does
not mean it is irrelevant as a comparison with Matthew. Evidence from the
papyri shows that the profession of innocence found in the Book of the
Dead continued to inspire religious practices in the Hellenistic period. 8
The closest Jewish parallel to Matthew 25:31-46 is found in the Midrash
on Psalm 118, which is usually dated between the sixth and the ninth
century CE. The midrash raises the question of entrance into the presence
of the Lord, and explains that the gates will be open to the one who has fed
the hungry, given drink to the thirsty, clothed the naked, and brought up
the fatherless:
Open to me the gates of righteousness (Ps. 118:19). When a man is asked in the
world-to-come: 'What was thy work?' and he answers: Ί fed the hungry,' it will be said
to him: ' This is the gate of the Lord (Ps. 118:20). Enter into it, O thou that didst feed
the hungry.'
When a man answers: Ί gave drink to the thirsty,' it will be said to him: 'This is the
gate of the Lord. Enter into it, O thou that didst give a drink to the thirsty'
When a man answers: Ί clothed the naked,' it will be said to him: ' This is the gate of
the Lord. Enter into it, O thou that didst clothe the naked.'
This will also be said to him that brought up the fatherless, and to them that gave
alms or performed deeds of lovingkindness.
And David said: I have done all these things. Therefore let all the gates be opened
for me. Hence it is said Open to me the gates of righteousness; I will enter into them, I will
give thanks unto the Lord (Ps. 118:19). 9
In both of these accounts the human being is presenting the evidence, cit­
ing their own good deeds. Compared with this self-confident attitude,
Matthew's account is quite different in that the justified have nothing to
say for themselves, except to question the rationale for their vindication. 10
The condemned also question the argument of the judge. But the purpose
of their inquiry is precisely the opposite. Their condemnation appears to
be a surprise to them, and they defiantly express their incomprehension of
the rationale.
I have quoted these examples because they are so strikingly similar and
yet so strikingly different from Matthew's account. They are, however, far
removed in time from Matthew's Gospel and cannot be brought directly to
bear on its interpretation. But they do give expression to a theme that is
well attested in sources that are closer to Matthew, namely the theme of
self-confidence before the divine judgment.
In the Testament ofZebulon, the fisherman Zebulon reports how he had
always fed the hungry and claims that God rewarded him: "Being compas­
sionate, I gave some of my catch to every stranger. If anyone were a trav­
eler, or sick, or aged, I cooked the fish, prepared it well, and offered to each
person according to his need, being either convivial or consoling. There­
fore the Lord made my catch to be an abundance offish; for whoever shares
n
with his neighbor receives multifold from the Lord" {T. Zeb. 6:4-6).
The sources from the pre-Christian period that show the strongest inter­
est in the afterlife are the Zoroastrian writings. In this literature we find
detailed descriptions of the soul's post-mortem journey. The HadokhtNask
of the Young Avesta, which is dated to the first half of the first millennium
BCE, explains what happens after death. At the end of the third night, the
soul of the faithful is met by a "maiden fair, bright, white-armed, strong,
tall-formed, high-standing, thick-breasted, beautiful of body, noble, of a
glorious seed, of the size of a maid in her fifteenth year, as fair as the fairest
things in the world" (2.9). 12 As it turns out, this wonderful being is none
other than the personification of the pure conscience of the faithful. Had-
hokht Nask continues: "And she, being his own conscience, answers him:
Ό thou youth of good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, of good
religion, I am thy own conscience!' Everybody did love thee for that great­
ness, goodness, fairness, sweet-scentedness, victorious strength and free­
dom from sorrow, in which thou dost appear to me; And so thou, O youth
of good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, of good religion! didst love
me for that greatness, goodness, fairness, sweet-scentedness, victorious
strength, and freedom from sorrow, in which I appear to thee" (2.11-12). 13
In other words, the deceased's own knowledge of good works, their own
conscience, will determine their fate after death.
Self-confident claims before the heavenly judgment are also attested in
the mystery religions. In the guide to a heavenly journey that is provided
in the so-called "Mithras Liturgy," the initiates are prepared for their encoun-
ter with the Pole Lords, who are responsible for punishing the wicked and
rewarding the righteous. The initiate is instructed to greet them with these
words: "to me, who am pious and god-fearing, you send health and sound-
ness of body and acuteness of hearing and seeing, and calmness in the
present good hours of this day" {PGM 4:683-686). 14 Faced with other-
worldly judgment, the initiates may cite their piety and confidently expect
a positive outcome. 15
A similar attitude is in evidence in an epitaph from Bithynia. Although
less detailed, an initiate of the Isis cult announces on his gravestone that he
did not go to the dismal Acheron, but to the harbor of the blessed. His
reputation among the followers of the cult serves to substantiate his claim. 16
These very diverse accounts of attitudes toward divine judgment after
death all differ clearly from Matthew's judgment scene in their focus on
the individual's own knowledge of his righteousness and good works.
Nothing indicates that Matthew's argument is directed specifically against any
of these accounts, but the contrast between self-confident claims before God's
judgment and the helpless attitude of the righteous appears to have been of
concern to him. The contrast between the blessed and the condemned is
introduced in the Sermon on the Mount, which corresponds in important
ways to the eschatological discourse in chapters 24-25 and shares its focus
on judgment. 17 The self-confident attitude of the group that is condemned
in 25:31-46 is anticipated in 7:21-23, where Jesus refers to the self-
confident people who addressed him "Lord, Lord" and were proud of their
impressive service. 18 As we have seen, it appears that there was a wide-
spread assumption that everyone needs to present their credentials when
facing divine judgment. Matthew seems to be aware of this assumption,
but he portrays it in a negative light.
Like the judgment scene in 25:31-46, the conclusion to the Sermon on
the Mount stresses that eschatological vindication is the result of right
action (7:21 -27). 19 Even good works done in Jesus' name may be insufficient
in the final judgment, as they do not necessarily qualify as doing the will
of the Father in heaven (7:21). Not merely action, therefore, but right
action is imperative.
The right action that is required in the Sermon on the Mount is an
expression of the radical love command that Jesus teaches. By fulfilling this
command, the disciples show themselves as children of their heavenly
Father (5:45, 48). Fulfilling this commandment is only possible with the
right attitude, the attitude that is described in the Beatitudes (Matt 5:3-12). 20
These makarisms anticipate the eschatological judgment which resurfaces
in the eschatological discourse in chapters 24-25. Matt 5:3 proleptically
predicates the eschatological blessing, possession of the kingdom of heaven,
of those who are poor in spirit. 21 The Matthean version of this makarism
interprets poverty as a spiritual attitude (cf. Luke 6:20). It refers to those
who recognize their status as beggars before God. 22 Consequently, their
attitude is characterized by humility. 23 (Cf. also 18:2-3 where entrance to the
eschatological kingdom is conditioned on becoming humble like a child.)
The attitude of the blessed ones is further unpacked in the following
makarisms. They mourn, realizing the state of imperfection in which they
find themselves. Eschatological blessing is also predicated of the meek,
those whose humble attitude is demonstrated in their lives as kindness. 24
Moreover, the blessed ones hunger and thirst for righteousness, pursuing a
manifestation of the ethical standard that is required to enter the kingdom
of heaven (5:20). Matthews makarisms thus move from describing the
fundamental spiritual orientation of the blessed ones to describing how
this orientation comes to expression in attitude and action. 25
Those condemned in 25:41-46 and those in 7:21-23 both stand as the
negative counterpart to the blessed one in 5:3. Those condemned are not
beggars before God and the final judgment. They come with a claim and
question the basis for the charges brought against them. 26 On the other
hand, those acquitted in 25:34-40 come empty-handed, without a pre-
pared defense, and their justification catches them by surprise. The good
works that they evidently had done were not done with one eye on the
eschatological judgment. 27 Rather, they had acted in accordance with the
commandment in Matt 6:3-4: "When you do your work of mercy, do not
let your left hand know what the right hand does, so that your work
of mercy may be in secret, so that your Father who sees in secret may
compensate you." Those on the right side have not done their works of
kindness to be seen by others, not even to be seen and remembered by
themselves. 28 They walk confidently with their Lord and do not keep a
record of good works, trusting that no such record is necessary, as they put
their faith in the Lord. 29
Since the condemned manifest such a self-asserting attitude, it is no
surprise that the works they cherish are works of power and authority
(7:22-23). Jesus explains in Matthew's Gospel that the nature of disciple-
ship is the exact opposite of authority. Disciples are called to serve, and the
first among them shall be the least (20:26-27; 23:11). The works that are
commanded in the Sermon on the Mount are acts of love without regard
for personal gain or comfort, even to the point of being self-degrading.
This love turns the other cheek to the assailant, cooperates when plundered
in court, and goes two miles when forced to go one (5:39-41).
The blessed person of the Beatitudes demonstrates the virtues that are per-
fectly exemplified by Jesus himself. In Matthews context, his last makarisms
follow as a natural conclusion, therefore. Those who are praised are those
who are so conformed to the model of their master that they are persecuted
for his sake. Matthews Beatitudes thus introduce the important imitation
theme. 30 As Jesus is the light of those who live in darkness (4:15-16), so are
the disciples the light of the world (5:14). As Jesus was persecuted, so will
the disciples be (10:24-25). As Jesus died on the cross, so must the disciples
deny their own self, take up their cross, and follow him (16:24). As Jesus
came to serve (20:28), so must the greatest among the disciples serve the
others (20:26-27). As the heavenly Father forgives sins, so must the disci-
ples forgive (6:14-15; 18:21-35). This imitation theme is reflected in the
judgment scene in Matt 25:31-46 as well. 31 In their works of kindness
towards the marginalized, those on Jesus' right side mirror the compassion
Jesus is known to show to all those who suffer.
In Matt 11:28-30, the disciples are called to learn from Jesus' attitude,
as he is meek and humble of heart. Through this description, Jesus stands
as an example par excellence of the blessed person described in the makarism
of Matt 5:5. 32 To learn from him, one has to come to him with one s heavy
burdens and find rest (11:28). Again, realizing one's need is fundamental
to discipleship. Paradoxically, the rest that Jesus provides consists in taking
his yoke upon oneself. This yoke most probably refers to Jesus' bringing
the perfect law, the law that requires wholehearted love. 33 In the Gospel of
Matthew, the gift and the task are intertwined. 34 There is an inextricable
connection between coming to Jesus as a needy person and adopting Jesus'
concern for the needy.
Accordingly, the Gospel of Matthew frequently expresses the conviction
that the righteousness of the disciples is a result of an internal quality, a
pure heart. 35 In this respect, the disciples are contrasted with the hypo-
crites, who look nice on the outside, but whose inside is full of the bones
of the dead (23:27). To become clean on the outside, it is necessary first to
make sure the inside is clean (23:26). This motif also explains the conflict
over purity laws. Impurity is not an external matter, but a matter of the
heart. A human being can therefore not become unclean by what comes in
through the mouth. Only what goes out of the mouth makes a human
being unclean (15:11). The reason is that what comes out of the mouth,
comes from the heart (15:18-19). A good tree bears good fruit (7:16-20;
12:33-35). 36
The fundamental virtue, essential if other virtues are expected to follow,
can also be described as generosity. Jesus insists that a healthy eye—a
Jewish idiom for generosity (cf. Sir 14:9-10; 31:13)—is the necessary pre-
supposition for the goodness of a human being. 37 An evil eye ruins the
whole person (6:22-23).
The warning against the evil eye recurs in the parable of the workers
in the vineyard (20:1-16). Matthew places this parable immediately after
Jesus' promise to the disciples that they will receive their reward for the
sacrifices they have made in this life (19:28-29). The parable functions as a
38
rejoinder to the question of eschatological reward and explains the gra­
cious character of the reward, as the landowner afforded all the workers a
full days pay, even those who only worked for one hour. This principle of
compensation makes for a surprise effect in this parable. The parable in
Sifra to Leviticus 26:9 describes the normal procedure: everyone is com­
39
pensated according to the amount of work they have done. As the con­
cluding warning shows, this unusual compensation principle demonstrates
40
the generosity of the landowner (20:15).
In the parable, those who had worked the whole day are not presented
41
as positive examples. The landowners generosity caused them to grum­
ble. He therefore asks them the probing question: Is your eye evil because
I am good? (20:15b). The disciples' question regarding eschatological reward
is thereby answered with a warning: as you look forward to the eschato­
logical reward, be prepared to see it be given to people you feel do not
deserve it as well as you. Beware that you do not begrudge them! The
implicit exhortation to Matthews audience is that the eschatological reward
must be anticipated with a generous attitude. They must joyfully accept
God's generosity and participate in his pleasure in showing his openhand-
edness to those who do not fully deserve it. 42
The parable of the king and the unforgiving slave (18:23-35) makes a
similar point. The king shows the servant unlimited mercy in canceling the
debt of ten thousand talents. This act of magnanimity makes no impres-
sion on the servant, however, and he brutalizes his fellow to make him
pay a debt of 100 denarii. Consequently, the king's act of generosity is
reversed, and the message is that God's forgiveness will only benefit those
who show mercy towards others.
If the interpretation indicated above is broadly correct, it can now be seen
to corroborate the inclusive interpretation of "all the nations" (25:32)
and "the least" (25:40, 45). With respect to the scope of judgment, the
major question is whether "all the nations" is intended to include the
Christian community or not. 43 My interpretation has presupposed that
this judgment scene reflects differences within the church, between the
true disciples and the hypocrites. "All nations" can therefore not be
restricted to non-Christians, but must have a universal reference. Literary
arguments favor this view. The theme of judgment is central to the Gospel
of Matthew, and the function of the judgment theme is almost always
paraenetic, to warn of the coming judgment and to inspire right action. 44
This function is especially clear in the speeches in Matthew, where the
disciples are warned of future judgment in 5:21-30; 7:13-14, 21-27;
13:24-30; 36-43,47-50; 18:8-9, 23-35; 24:51. Reward in the future judg­
ment is also offered as a source of motivation for Jesus' disciples in 16:27;
19:29. Most significantly, those condemned in 25:41-45 are described as
belonging to the church. They address the king as "Lord" (25:44), which
is a designation that the Gospel of Matthew only reports on the lips of
disciples and individuals aspiring to be disciples. 45
The account of the last judgment functions as a summary of Jesus' mes­
sage in chs. 24-25, if not the whole section from 16:21. Part of the purpose
of this section is to demonstrate to the readers that discipleship means
suffering and servanthood (16:24-25; 20:25-28). 46 In the eschatological
discourse, the disciples are exhorted to be ready for the second coming, a
coming that entails a judgment where the true will be separated from the
false, as forewarned in 7:21-23; 13:24-30; 36-43. In his account of Jesus'
conflicts with the Jewish leaders in Jerusalem, Matthew has also empha­
sized how the final judgment directly affects the church. He is the only evan­
gelist that has included the account of the man without wedding clothes
who was ejected from the banquet (22:11-13; cf. Luke l4:l6-24). 4 7
A universal interpretation of "the least" is strengthened when the pas­
sage is read in light of the imitation of Jesus theme. The scholarly discus­
sion regarding this term centers around whether it is limited to Christian
missionaries or all Christians or whether it includes all marginalized human
beings. Significantly, the acts of the vindicated ones reflect their imitation
of Jesus. Jesus was the light that shone beyond the recognized boundaries
of the people of God (4:13-16). He pronounced the disciples to be the
light of the world (κόσμος) and called them to let their light shine for
human beings in general (5:14-16).
Despite the limitations of Jesus' earthly ministry (10:5; 15:24), he fre­
quently demonstrated that his acts of mercy also intended to break the
boundaries between Jew and Gentile (8:10-13; 15:28; cf. 4:15; 12:18-21;
21:43; 24:14; 28:19). Since Matthew understands the disciples to con­
tinue Jesus' ministry, it is intrinsically likely that he would understand
their acts of mercy as boundary-breaking as well, not limiting them to
members of the community.
This is all the more so when it is recalled that Matthew's Jesus extends
the love command so that it applies to one's enemies (5:43-48). It is in the
context of the love command that the use of the term in 25:40 must be
understood. True, this word is frequently used with reference to Christians
(12:48-50; 18:15, 21, 35; 23:8; 28:10). But in the Sermon on the Mount,
where the term is used in the context of the love command, the scope is
most likely wider. It refers to one's duties to other people in general (5:22-
24; 7:3-5). 49
The decisive argument in favor of an inclusive interpretation, however,
is the rhetorical function of the judgment scene. In the preceding two
parables, the audience of the story is encouraged to identify with the wise
bridesmaids (25:1-13) and the wise stewards (25:14-30). In the final judg­
ment scene, the audience is similarly invited to identify with the righteous
50
on the right. As in the other parables, the implicit exhortation to the
church is to be ready for judgment.
The climax of the story is the surprise rationale for judgment: what you
did or did not do to one of the least, you did to the Son of Man (25:40,
45). This rationale is phrased as a saying in the second person, directed to
those being judged. With such a climax, the story's likely rhetorical effect
on the audience is that they hear this second person address as directed to
themselves. They have the advantage, however, of hearing this verdict as a
forewarning. They are not brought forth to the last judgment yet; they are
given a preview of it. The second person address functions as an implicit
exhortation: do these acts of kindness to the needy, because what you do
to them, you do to the Son of Man.
The judgment scene in Matt 25:31-46 is a fitting conclusion to the teach-
ing on judgment throughout the Gospel of Matthew. Those who are com-
pletely dependent on Christ for their salvation will come to him and learn
from his mind-set of generosity. Their attitudes and works will correspond.
Freely receiving their salvation from the grace of Christ, they are not
concerned with justifying themselves. 51 Instead, they are preoccupied with
emulating the generosity and boundary-breaking acts of mercy that Jesus
has modeled.
The Gospel of Matthew seems to be more concerned with good works
in the final judgment than any other writing in the New Testament (with
the possible exception of the epistle of James). Good works are not merely
works, however. 52 They spring out of an attitude characterized by depen-
dency and generosity. Jesus' true disciples are dependent as beggars upon
his grace, and, from the encounter with that grace, they have learned to
emulate his generosity.
The judgment scene in Matt 25:31-46 brings together the characteris-
tics of the true disciples in a rhetorically powerful story. The ones on the
right hand side of the Son of Man have imitated Christ in his good works
towards the needy, knowing no limits to the exercise of their mercy. The
righteous are also blissfully ignorant of their own merits. Their ignorance
betrays the attitude that Matthew predicates of the righteous throughout
his Gospel. They trust in God and they do not do their good works for the
purpose of self-justification. Thus, they are distinguished from the false
disciples and the hypocrites, who wear their good works on their sleeve.