2 Cor 5:21 is often—discouragingly!—described as One of the most
difficult verses in the New Testament". Its problems are obvious. Perhaps
the most striking feature of the verse is Pauls extraordinary use of the
terms αμαρτία and δικαιοσύνη. Why does he use nouns, and what does he
mean by them? The statement that Christ was made sin startles us, but the
parallel clause, informing us that we have become the righteousness of
God, is equally puzzling, for the addition of the word Θεοΰ destroys the
symmetry of the parallel and is certainly unexpected. Even the simple words
in the verse cause problems: what does Paul mean by ημείς? Does Paul
meander in his use of "us" in this section between the apostolic (meaning
Paul and his co-workers) to the general (meaning "all Christians") and is he
thinking in v. 21 of all Christians or of the role of the apostles? Finally,
what is the relationship of this verse to the argument as a whole? Why, in
the course of a lengthy exposition of his understanding of his ministry,
does Paul throw in no less than three summary statements of the gospel, in
w. 14-15, 18-19, and 21? What is their precise relevance to his argument?
"Christ was made sin for us." Attempting to understand the enigmatic
statement in 2 Corinthians 5 by turning to another of equal complexity
may seem foolish, but 2 Cor 5:21 and Gal 3:13 are so similar that they cry
out to be examined together, and one passage may well illuminate the
other. As with 2 Cor 5:21, Gal 3:13 is part of a longer argument. This
begins back in 2:15, and concerns the way in which both Jews and Gen­
tiles have been brought into a new relationship with God—a relationship
which is defined by the verb δικαιόω. The difficulties of translating this
verb into English are such that for the purposes of this paper I shall use the
Old English "rightwise", rather than the usual "justify". Our new relation­
ship with God has come about, Paul argues, not on the basis of the works
of the law, but on the basis of πίστις, "faith" or "trust". We have trusted in
Christ in order to be "rightwised" with God through faith, and not through
the works of the law. A summary of the gospel in v. 20 explains that Christ s
death means that "I" have died (with Christ) to the law, and that Christ
now lives within "me".
To back up his argument, Paul now appeals to experience. The outpour­
ing of God s Spirit which the Galatians have experienced is proof of their
new relationship with God (3:1-5), and this Spirit was received, he reminds
them, on the basis of πίστις, not on the basis of the works of the law, which
belong to the realm of the flesh. Next come scriptural proofs (3:6-9). First,
Paul quotes the case of Abraham, who believed—that is, trusted in—God,
and so was counted righteous (Gen. 15:6). Abrahams descendants are
those who—like him—trust in God. The promise made to Abraham was
that all nations would be blessed in him: in other words, they would be his
children, members of Gods people, and would inherit the land.
The reference to blessing leads into a second scriptural proof. In contrast
to those whom Paul describes as being έκ πίστεως stand those who are εξ
έργων; just as the blessing belongs to the former, so a curse rests on those
who rely on the works of the law, since scripture says "Cursed is everyone
who does not persevere in doing everything that is written in the book of
the law" (3:10). Absurdly, as it seems to us, Paul uses Deut 27:26 here to
support an argument which directly opposes what the verse in its original
context clearly states. How can the curse pronounced in Deuteronomy on
those who fail to persevere in the things written in the law be said to have
fallen on those who observe the works of the law? The quotation appears to
prove what Paul is attempting to deny!
Space precludes an attempt to answer this question, so we must simply
note that Paul apparently believes that the quotation makes his case. He
then comments that it is evident that no-one is in fact "rightwised" before
God έν νόμφ, since (Hab 2:4) "the righteous one lives εκ πίστεως". The
law, on the other hand, is not based on faith, but on the principle of works,
since "the one who does these things lives by them" (Lev 18:5). The asser­
tion that "it is evident" is apparently based on the fact that nothing is said
in this text from Leviticus about being righteous, whereas Hab 2:4 links
righteousness with faith. Why, then, we may reasonably ask, does the law
command Israel to "do" and "live by" the commands of the law? The rea­
son will be spelt out later in the chapter, when we discover that the law was
an interim measure, a παιδαγωγός "until faith came" (v. 23). For Paul, that
means that Hab. 2:4 is understood to be a promise of what would happen
once faith came. Until that time, all are under the curse of the law, since
the law could not bring righteousness, or make alive (v. 21).
From this curse Christ has redeemed us, by himself becoming a curse—a
fact demonstrated by the quotation of Deut 21:23, which pronounces a
curse on everyone whose body is hung on a tree. The purpose, declares
Paul, was that, in Christ, the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gen­
tiles, and that we might receive the Spirit through faith. How can Christ's
scandalous death bring blessing to others? Paul fails to explain, though in
the rest of the chapter he tells us that the blessing comes to those who are
u
in Christ", and that it comes through πίστις. Christ is the seed of Abra­
ham, and so the one to whom the blessing belongs; those who by faith are
baptized into him—Greeks as well as Jews, slaves as well as freemen, both male
and female—share his status, and so become Abraham s heirs. The blessing
promised to Abraham regarding his seed thus comes to those Gentiles who
are united with Christ (v. 29), and who share Abrahams faith (v. 7).
A second ίνα clause tells us that the reason why Christ became a curse
was that we might receive the promised Spirit of God. Paul has already
argued that the Galatians received the Spirit through faith, not by obedi­
ence to the works of the law, and he has linked that argument to the exam­
ple of Abraham by the word καθώς, which introduces his quotation of
Gen. 15:6 in 3:6. It would seem that the blessing promised to Abraham is
understood by Paul to be the gift of the Spirit to those who are "rightwised"
by faith. This Spirit is sent to those who are "in Christ Jesus", and is a sign
that they, like him, are "sons of God" (3:26; 4:4-6).
Paul spells out clearly how Christ is the source of blessing, but fails to
explain how the curse has been neutralised and transformed. Although he
does not specifically refer to the resurrection in 3:13, it clearly underlies his
argument, just as it does in 2:19-20, where again it is presumed. It is per­
haps not accidental that Galatians begins—unusually—with the declara­
tion that God raised Jesus Christ from the dead (1:1). The resurrection is
fundamental to the argument.
Gal 3:13 and 2 Cor 5:21 are both statements of what some of us have
described—for lack of a more adequate term—as an "interchange" between
Christ and the believer. 1 Christ is identified with our condition, in order
that we may be identified with him, and so share in what he is. What Paul
understood by this was expressed brilliantly by Irenaeus, in the classic sum­
mary: : "Christ became what we are, in order that we might become what
he is." 2 Interestingly, however, neither Gal 3:13 nor 2 Cor 5:21 offers us a
statement that is as symmetrical as the one coined by Irenaeus.
In Galatians, the statement that "Christ became... in order that we" is
part of a much more complex sentence. First, we are told that "Christ
redeemed us from the curse of the law" by becoming "a curse" for our sake.
Since it is those who base their lives on "works" who are under the curse of
the law (v. 10), the "us" here presumably refers to Jewish Christians, 3 even
though the blessing—as Paul immediately makes clear—extends to Gentiles.
Why, however, does Paul describe Christ as "a curse" rather than as "cursed"?
This is the more intriguing, since his citation of Deut 21:23 follows the
LXX in using an adjective, meaning "cursed". Perhaps it is because Paul
has been using the nouns "curse" and "blessing" in his argument,
5
and wants to pick them up. Perhaps, also, it is because the Hebrew of
Deut 21:23 states that the malefactors body is exposed as a sign that he is
"the curse of God". That, of course, is an ambiguous phrase. Does it mean,
as the LXX understands it to mean, "cursed by God", or does it mean "a
curse—i.e. an insult—to God"? In an excursus to his commentary, Light-
foot cites Jewish and Christian evidence that the latter view was "the popu­
lar Jewish interpretation (shared therefore by Jewish Christians) at all
events from the second century of the Christian era". 6 Does Paul have this
sense in mind? Is this why he uses the noun, κατάρα, rather than the adjec­
tive? And is this why he omits the words υπό του θεοΰ from his quotation
of the LXX? Pseudo-Jonathan explains that exposure on a tree is "a disgrace
before the Lord", because the executed man is made in the image of
God. Most commentators assume that by using the LXX to explain the
word "curse", Paul is indicating that he means "cursed by God", but his
introductory words, "Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law"
suggest that he understands Christ to have fallen under the curse pro­
nounced by the law.
The third possible explanation of Pauls use of the noun κατάρα is found
in the Jewish understanding that those who were under a curse became a
source of contamination to others. Thus Pseudo-Jonathan goes on to
explain that the malefactors body must be removed from the tree by night­
fall lest it should pollute the land. The well-known story of Achan 7 dem­
onstrates how the wrong-doer brought a curse on others, and therefore had
to be destroyed, together with everything belonging to him. To say that
Christ became "a curse" is to say more than that he was "cursed": it sug­
gests that he became a source of contamination to others. Logically, there­
fore, one might expect Paul to continue by saying that Christ brought a
curse on others. In fact, however, the opposite is true: he became a source
of blessing. Nevertheless, although the divine purpose was to bring bless­
ing to the Gentiles and to all who believe, yet to those who refuse to trust
in him he remains a σκάνδαλον, 8 and so, for a time at least, the cause of
Israel's failure and exclusion. 9
What, then, of the blessing? The second part of our "interchange" state­
ment corresponds to the first in using a noun, but there the similarity
ceases. If the two clauses were strictly parallel, we might expect Paul to
write either that "Christ became a curse in order that the Gentiles might
become a blessing", or that "Christ became cursed, in order that the Gen­
tiles might be blessed"—which is, in effect, what most commentators
understand him to mean. There is a further complication, however, since
the symmetry is disturbed by the fact that Paul continues with a second
ϊνα clause—"in order that we might receive the promised Spirit"—which
apparently provides a definition of what it means to receive the blessing.
Now it may well be argued that if a pattern does not fit, we should not
impose one it what Paul says—and I would have to agree. But I do not
think that we should abandon the notion of "interchange" quite so readily.
For it is clear that in speaking of Christ being made a curse, Paul is think­
ing of his identification with humanity's condition. The curse, he has
insisted, rests on all who do not have πίστις—and since this πίστις comes
only with Christ (3:23, 25), this curse rests on all humanity until his com­
ing. How, then, we may wonder, was Abraham able to trust God and to be
counted δίκαιος? The answer seems to be that what Abraham trusted was
nit promise of God, a promise that was fulfilled in Christ. Abraham's faith
was in a sense proleptic. "Scripture, foreseeing that God would c rightwise'
the Gentiles through faith, declared the gospel to Abraham beforehand"
(v. 8). Between the promise and its fulfilment we have the law, under which
we were "imprisoned" until the coming of faith (v. 23). This law was unable
to bestow either life or righteousness (v. 21). The blessing promised to
Abraham is given to those who believe, on the basis of πίστις Χρίστου
(v. 22). The fact that faith comes only with the coming of Christ (v. 23)
offers support to the suggestion that Paul may be thinking here of Christ's
own πίστις as the basis of ours—but that is by the way. 10
By being born of a woman, and under the law, therefore (4:4), Christ
came under the curse of the law, 11 and his scandalous death demonstrates
this. On the other side of the ledger, the gift of the Spirit demonstrates that
the promise made to Abraham has been fulfilled: blessing has been poured
out on the Gentiles. Since this blessing has come to the believing Gentiles
as a result of their baptism into Christ, it is plain that the crucified Christ
is not, after all, a "curse", but a source of blessing. The resurrection has
annulled the curse of the law.
We turn back, at last, to 2 Corinthians 5, and straight away we notice that
here, too, we have a lack of symmetry. It is true that this time we have two
nouns, so that we can reduce the central contrast to the statement that
He made him to be sin for us
in order that we might become righteousness in him
— but that is to ignore the word Θεοΰ! Moreover, the introductory "he
who knew no sin" creates a further imbalance by forming an additional
contrast to "he made him to be sin".
This introductory phrase is perhaps easy to understand. The description
of Christ as αμαρτία is shocking—so shocking that Paul apparently con­
sidered it necessary to ensure that he was not misunderstood. This time
there can be no question of the noun being used for an adjective: Christ
was not made "sinful". Yet almost all commentators interpret the second
noun as equivalent to an adjective. This can hardly be simply δίκαιος, how­
ever, since Paul qualifies δικαισοσύνη with Θεοΰ. Again, many commenta­
tors would endorse the comment of C.K. Barrett, who suggests that if the
statement that "Christ became siri' means that "he came to stand in that
relation with God which normally is the result of sin, estranged from God
and the object of his wrath", then "we became righteousness" means that
we "have come to stand in that relationship with God which is described
by the term righteousness, that is, we are acquitted in his court, justified,
12
reconciled". According to this forensic understanding of the term,
δικαισοσύνη is treated as the equivalent of the participle δικαιωθέντες, 13
and Θεοΰ is regarded as a genitive of origin: it is God who has "rightwised"
us, and God in whose court we are acquitted. An alternative explanation
suggests that δικαισοσύνη, like αμαρτία—and like κατάρα and ευλογία in
Gal 3:13f—should be seen as an active power.
Let us begin, once again, by looking at the passage in context. The theme
of 2 Corinthians is Paul's ministry—and though the epistle opens with
thanksgiving that he and the Corinthian congregation have been recon­
ciled, the letter is in effect a defence of his ministry. Paul's understanding
of his apostleship is nothing less than conformity to the Gospel: his minis­
try is a revelation of glory (chapter 3)—but the glory is that of Christ,
which means that Paul carries the death of Jesus in his body, in order that
the life of Jesus may be displayed there. This means that he is given up to
death for Jesus' sake, in order that others might live (4:11-12). Yet the
revelation of the glory of Christ is not confined to apostles. "We are all
being transformed into [Christ's] image", writes Paul (3:18). 14 It is true
that Paul seems to see his role as an apostle to be a channel of the "inter­
change" of experience that has come to him in Christ. Sharing in the
sufferings of Christ, he has been able to pass on the consolation he has
received to the Corinthians (1:3-7); experiencing the dying of Jesus, he has
been enabled to bring life to them (4:8-12); his weakness has been the
means of conveying Christ's power (13:3-4). But the process does not stop
there! The Corinthians themselves are a "letter of Christ" (3:3), and the
grace they experience extends to others (4:15). 15 Those who have been
made rich through Christ's poverty (8:9) are urged to share their wealth
with others in ministering to the saints in Jerusalem (9:10-15). In an ear­
lier letter, 1 Corinthians, Paul had already defended his understanding of
his apostolic role and urged the Corinthians to imitate him (1 Cor 4:15;
11:1). The apostle's life is modelled on the pattern of the Gospel, but it is
intended as a model for others.
The use of the first person plural throughout these chapters clearly
applies to Paul in particular; he is describing his own experience. Yet what
he says is true—or ought to be true!—of Christians in general. The pattern
of the Gospel should be stamped on all their lives.
At the beginning of 2 Corinthians 5, Paul describes how "our earthly
tent" is being destroyed, and how "we groan", longing for a better dwell­
ing; he is undoubtedly drawing here on his own experience, and precisely
because it is his experience, it is linked with his apostolic calling. Neverthe­
less, the experience of mortality is common to others, and the confidence
he expresses should also be shared by others. Similarly, "we must all appear
before the judgement seat of Christ" (5:10). Immediately following this,
however, the "we" of v. 11 refers to Paul in particular: "we try to persuade
others", he says, and then describes what that means. Whatever he does is
"for God" and "for you" (v. 13). V. 14 spells out the reason, and introduces
the first brief summary of the gospel: "The love of Christ controls us, since
we hold that one died for all, therefore all have died. And one died for all,
in order that the living might no longer live to themselves but to the one
who died and rose for them." At its heart, this summary in w. 14-15 con­
tains yet another statement implying an "interchange":
he died for all
in order that [they] might live to [him].
Once again, however, the brief summary has been overlaid with various
explanations. The fact that Christ died for all means, first, that "all have
died": in other words, his death was not a substitute for theirs, but in some
sense brought it about. Secondly, his death for all means that "those who
live" should no longer live "to themselves", but "to him who died and was
raised for them". Whether οι ζώντες means "all who live" (i.e. all humanity)
or "those who share Christ's risen life" (i.e. all Christians) is not clear, but
since the clause expresses purpose, perhaps we should understand him to mean
the former. Moreover, the fact that Paul's argument is based on the state­
ment that "Christ died for all" suggests that he is thinking of life for all.
We have, then, a statement of the gospel that is both familiar—"he died
and was raised"—and yet distinctive in the way that it indicates the purpose
of his death and resurrection. But why does Paul quote this summary of the
gospel here? He does so in order to apply it to his own ministry: the gospel
means "living for Christ", and for him, that means being constrained by
Christ to persuade others—by word and example—of the truth of the
gospel. At the same time, he is anxious that the Corinthians should see the
relevance of this gospel to their own lives.
A further consequence of what has happened is that judgements "accord­
ing to the flesh" are no longer appropriate (v. 16). This is because there is,
in Christ, a new creation: the old has gone and the new has come (v. 17).
Here, too, what Paul says applies to all who are in Christ: hence he uses τις
in v. 17. But the reason why he says it is probably related to his own com­
mission. Before he was "in Christ" he had judged him "according to the
flesh", but he does so no longer. And it is precisely because his understand­
ing of who Christ is is not "according to the flesh" that he has what the
Corinthians—who still have a tendency to see things from that perspective
(1 Cor 3:1-4)—regard as a strange understanding of what it means to be
an apostle.
Everything that has happened, we are now told, is from God, "who
reconciled us to himself, and gave us the ministry of reconciliation" (v. 18).
The first "us" here cannot be limited to Paul and his colleagues: possibly
Paul means "us Christians", but the parallel statement in v. 19, which tells
us that "in Christ God reconciled the world to himself", suggests that he
may be thinking of the whole human race. But to whom is the message of
reconciliation entrusted (w. 18b, 19b)? Is it to all who accept reconcilia­
tion? Or is Paul thinking of his own call to proclaim the gospel?
Since in v. 18 Paul speaks of God reconciling "us" meaning "us Chris­
tians", and since he immediately says that the ministry—or message—of
reconciliation is entrusted to "us", we expect the "us" in v. 18b and v. 19b
to have the same meaning as in v. 18a. Is this ministry, then, entrusted to
Christians in general? Now there is certainly a sense in which we may say
that all who accept reconciliation from God become themselves the agents
of reconciliation. Paul rarely uses the verb καταλλάσσω; apart from the
three occasions in w. 18-20, we find it only in Rom 5:10 (where it is used
twice, in both cases of our reconciliation to God) and 1 Cor 7:11, where
the Christian woman is urged to be reconciled to her estranged husband.
The noun καταλλαγή is found elsewhere only in Rom 5:11 and 11:15,
where Paul describes Israel's failure as bringing about the reconciliation of
the world. But though the term "ministry of reconciliation" is unusual, the
idea that Paul's ministry reflects the gospel is certainly not, and neither is
his conviction that his converts should share his task. The Corinthians
share his sufferings and consolation (1:7), and they are urged to help him
by their prayers (1:11) and to imitate him (1 Cor 4:16; 11:1). This idea is
stressed in Philippians, where Paul urges members of the Christian com­
munity to prove themselves to be "innocent and above reproach", to "shine
like stars in a dark world, and to proffer the word of life" (2:15-16). Paul
describes the Philippians as having shared in the work of ministry (1:5),
and his purpose in writing seems to be to ensure that they continue his
understanding of ministry as conformity to the Gospel, appealing to them
to imitate him (3:17; 4:9). 16
Nevertheless, what he has in mind in 2 Cor 5:18-20 is clearly his own
calling as an "ambassador of Christ": 17 he is still trying to explain his under-
standing of his ministry to the Corinthians. In other words, the context
suggests that we should understand the pronouns in w. 18b, 19b and 20a
to refer specifically to Paul and his fellow evangelists. 18 The fact that there
is an obvious awkwardness in moving from "us" meaning "us men and
women" in v. 18a to "us" meaning "us apostles" in v. 18b 19 is perhaps due
to the fact that Paul is deliberately narrowing down the meaning here
because he wants to demonstrate how he has endeavoured to live out the
gospel. It is perhaps for this reason that Paul has again summarized the
gospel, using language which he then applies to his own mission. As a
result of the gospel, God is described as
giving to us the ministry of reconciliation...
entrusting to us the word of reconciliation...
entreating through us.
We suggest, then, that the language Paul uses here to summarize the gospel—
that in it God reconciles the world to himself—has once again been cho-
sen because it is appropriate to what he wishes to say about his ministry. In
other words, he understands his role in terms of bringing about reconcili-
ation between God and the gentiles.
So what, specifically, is the message of reconciliation? V. 21 offers us yet
a third summary. Once again, it speaks of the significance of Christ's
death:
The one who knew no sin
God made sin on our behalf
in order that we might become the righteousness of God in him.
The previous summaries spoke of Christ dying "for all", and of his death
being a means of reconciliation for "the world", whereby transgressions are
not "counted". The third, which is the "appeal" made by Christ's ambas­
sadors to the world, is more personal: "Christ was made sin for us".
Why αμαρτία? The noun cannot here be a substitute for an adjective, but
is it perhaps shorthand for a phrase? Does it mean "sin-offering"? 20 Attractive
as this interpretation has been to some commentators, it must be rejected:
Paul can hardly have used αμαρτία with two different meanings almost side
by side. But how could Christ have been "made sin"? In Galatians 3, the
context offered some sort of explanation as to why Paul might have employed
the nouns, "curse" and "blessing", but there is no help of this kind here. The
horror of the word serves to underline the need of the world for "reconcili­
ation"; this is what we are without Christ—"sin"—alienated from God. Sin
is for Paul an alien power that corrupts the world and leads to death, because
of the weakness of the flesh (Romans 6-7). The Old Testament provides an
analogy of what it means to be identified with sin in the scapegoat, and
Jesus' own experience of "being made sin", cut off from God, is graphically
portrayed in the cry of dereliction (Mark 15:34//Matt. 27:46).
The purpose, we are told, was "that we might become the righteousness
of God in him". Once again we must ask "who are the c we'?" The assump­
tion that δικαιοσύνη is equivalent to δικαιωθέντες means that the major­
ity of commentators conclude that the "we" here must refer to all Christians:
we are ¿//"rightwised", "accepted in God's court", and the "righteousness"
is understood to be a divine gift bestowed on believers. Θεοΰ then empha­
sizes the fact that we are talking about a righteousness whose origin is God,
not man. But though the phrase "the righteousness of God" is used else­
where in contrast to "my own righteousness" (Rom 10:3; Phil 3:9), this
particular contrast hardly seems relevant here. Why, then, should Θεοΰ be
used here? It may well be, of course, that Paul instinctively emphasized the
fact that any "righteousness" that Christians possessed came from God.
But the phrase δικαιοσύνη Θεοΰ presents us with a double puzzle. If Paul
has in mind here our "rightwising", then why does he use the noun,
δικαιοσύνη, rather than δικαιωθέντες? Is the noun used merely to provide
a contrast to αμαρτία? Turning back to Gal 3:13, we remember that there
was in fact no symmetry there, because Paul did not say that the Gentiles
had become a blessing, but rather that the blessing came to them. On the
analogy of that passage, we might expect him to say here that "Christ
became sin in order that righteousness might come to us"—or "in order
that we might receive righteousness"—the expression he uses in Rom 9:30.
Instead, he declares that we become the righteousness of God.
Essential to understanding Paul's way of thinking is the phrase εν αύτφ,
which features in so many of these "interchange" passages. It is only when
we are united with Christ that we become righteousness. Just as he was
identified with our sin, so we—because we are in him—are now identified
with God's righteousness. We become what he is. A similar idea is expressed
in 1 Cor 1:30, where Paul declares that Christ "became for us wisdom
from God, righteousness and sanctification and redemption". 21 He is seen
here as the source of our righteousness, as well as of wisdom, sanctification,
and redemption. These terms are all dynamic. If Christ is "for us wisdom
from God", that is because he is himself both "the power of God and the
wisdom of God" (1 Cor 1:24).
What, then, can it mean to "become God's righteousness"? It was Ernst
Käsemann who suggested that many exegetes of this passage had been mis-
led because their understanding of the phrase "the righteousness of God"
in Paul had been largely shaped by the Reformation tradition. Käsemann
argued that in some passages, at least, the phrase should be understood as
a subjective genitive characterizing God's own nature and activity, rather
than as a righteousness bestowed on men and women. In Jewish thought,
God's righteousness is his integrity, his faithfulness to the covenant, his
justice; it is demonstrated in putting things right, and is therefore revealed
in both salvation and judgement. We should remember that "δικαιοσύνη
θεοΰ is for Paul, as it is for the Old Testament and Judaism in general, a
phrase expressing divine activity". 22 This meaning is clear in Rom 1:17; 3:5,
21-6, in all of which God's righteousness is revealed in salvation or (Rom 3:5)
judgement, while in 1 Cor 1:30, "it appears as the direct manifestation of
the Christ". 23 Käsemann concluded that in 2 Cor 5:21, God's righteous-
ness becomes manifested on earth in "those who live under the eschato-
logical justice of God". 24 Bultmann disputed Käsemann's interpretation,
saying that it was unnecessary to hold that a phrase had the same meaning
in every case. 25 This is certainly true—but the meaning elsewhere may
nevertheless be a helpful guide! 26 Not surprisingly, Bultmann understood
the phrase here to mean that we are "justified" by God. I wonder, however,
whether Käsemann's suggestion has not pointed us to the key to under-
standing why Paul used this particular phrase here. Elsewhere, it seems
clear from the context that for Paul, δικαιοσύνη Θεοΰ does indeed refer
primarily to God's activity in setting things to rights. Even in Rom 10:3
and Phil 3:9, where God's righteousness stands in contrast to "human
righteousness", it is plain that his righteousness is manifested in the gospel
(Rom 10:4; Phil 3:8-10). Is there anything in the context of 2 Cor. 5:21,
therefore, to suggest that when Paul uses the phrase there, he perhaps
means that "we" are in some sense partakers in this divine activity?
In looking at the previous two summaries of the gospel (2 Cor 5:14-15,
18-19) we suggested that Paul's purpose in quoting them was to apply
them, in particular, to his own ministry. Is he perhaps doing something
similar here? Has he once again chosen language that is particularly appo­
site to his understanding of his ministry? The context suggests that this is
so. Already, in the first few chapters of 2 Corinthians, he has spelt out the
way in which his own suffering has brought consolation to the Corinthi­
ans: "Death is at work in us, but life in you" (4:12). Following 2 Cor 5:21
he continues "Working together with [Christ], we entreat you not to
receive the grace of God in vain" (6:1). He has moved here from the gen­
eral to the particular: picking up the verb παρακαλέω, used in v. 20, where
the audience was not specified, he now addresses the Corinthians. "Now is
the day of salvation", he declares (v. 2)—they must not lose what they have
been given! It is fear that they might do so that explains why he is so anx­
ious lest they reject his ministry (6:3). Spelling out what this ministry has
cost him, and the gifts that he has needed to exercise it, he declares that he
has ministered "in the power of God, with the weapons of righteousness in
his right and left hands" (6:7).
In the exercise of his ministry, then, Paul demonstrates the power of
God, even though he is enduring weakness and affliction. This experience
reflects the paradox seen in Christ, who suffered weakness and shame, but
who is the source of power and righteousness (1 Cor 1:23-25, 30). This is
an idea that he will expound in 2 Cor 13:3-4:
Christ was crucified because of weakness
But he lives because of God's power
So we are weak in him
But live with him—towards you—because of Gods power. 27
The weapons of righteousness wielded by Paul are of course also supplied
by God. The true minister of God, working in the power of God, embod­
ies the gospel—the dying and rising of Christ—and so is himself an instru­
ment of righteousness. So it is, in 6:10, that Paul claims that by sharing in
the extraordinary paradox of Christ's incarnation, death and resurrec­
tion—which means that though he is dying, yet he is alive (v. 9)—he is
able, though poor, to make others rich (6:10), thus sharing in the mission
of Christ himself (8:9).
Although both Bultmann and Barrett rejected Käsemann's understand-
ing of the phrase δικαιοσύνη Θεοΰ in 2 Cor 5:21, it was Bultmann him­
self—quoted approvingly by Barrett 28 —who summed up most clearly
what I am suggesting is conveyed by understanding δικαιοσύνη Θεοΰ in an
active, rather than a passive, sense. I use Barrett's translation: "With the
cross, God instituted the office of reconciliation, the word of reconciliation
(2 Cor v. 18f); in other words, the preaching itself also belongs to the
event of salvation
in it Christ is encountered, God's own word... is
encountered: 'So we act for Christ, while God at the same time preaches
through our mouth'." 29 And as Paul reminds us in Rom 1:16-17, it is in the
gospel, which is the power of God, working towards salvation, that the
righteousness of God is revealed. Should we be surprised, then, if the apos-
tle whose manner of life—as well as his preaching—is conformed to the
gospel, and in whom the power of God is at work, has become "the righ-
teousness of God"? This is what it means for Paul "to live for Christ", not
himself, and to be an "ambassador for Christ", entrusted with "the message
of reconciliation". Could this explain why, in this third summary of the
gospel, he uses the language he does?
Nevertheless, it is "we" who become the righteousness of God, and that
righteousness should therefore be revealed in the lives of all believers, not
just those of the apostles. If Christ is the source of "righteousness and
sanctification" (1 Cor 1:30), then those who, in him, become what he is,
should also embody righteousness and sanctification. Perhaps this explains
why Paul goes on, in 6:14-7:1, to urge Christians to live holy lives: righ-
teousness and lawlessness cannot be partners, 30 any more than can Christ
and Beliar. Although this passage is often regarded as an intrusion into
2 Corinthians (in spite of the lack of textual evidence to support this view),
it is certainly appropriate for Paul to remind his readers that righteousness
is incompatible with idolatry and immorality. 31 Being the righteousness of
God must mean being like him, since he is their God and they are his
people (6:16). Being righteousness implies living righteously.
The passage's relevance to the theme of the letter becomes clearer when
we recall that Paul has described the Corinthians as his letter of recom-
mendation (3:2): what they are validates both his ministry and his gos-
pel. 32 If the righteousness of God is revealed in the gospel and in the life of
the apostle, it must be revealed also in the faith and lives of those who
respond to the gospel—and that means that what they are and do will be
the means of witnessing to the gospel. Paul is not demanding that Chris-
tians withdraw from the world—how could he, when he did not do so
himself? What he does insist is that those who are called to be channels of
righteousness and light must not compromise with the dubious morality
of their neighbours, but cleanse themselves and "make holiness perfect"
(2 Cor 7:1; cf. 1 Cor 1:30). God himself will then live among them, and
they will be his temple and his holy people. God's righteousness will be
seen in them.
Paul's appeal to the Corinthians in chapters 8-9 can also be seen as a
logical continuation from the conviction that Christians are agents of righ-
teousness. This section begins with a reminder that the Macedonians have
longed to share in Paul's ministry to the saints (8:14) and have done so by
contributing to his collection. Paul then urges the Corinthians, also, to
share in every kind of good work. Since God's righteousness abides for
ever, he will increase the yield oí their righteousness (9:8-10): once again,
we see the link between God's righteousness and that of Christians—and
this righteousness is demonstrated in bringing assistance to those in need.
It is certainly no accident that the key appeal in this section is made on the
basis of another of Paul's "interchange" statements: "you know the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that—being rich—he became poor for your sake, in
order that you, by his poverty, might become rich" (8:9). The Corinthians,
too, must in their turn bring riches to others. By doing so, they will be
sharing in Paul's ministry, and God's saving power will work through them.
In 2 Cor 5:14-21, Paul has given us three summaries of the gospel. I
have suggested that the language he uses is chosen in order to draw out the
particular relevance of the gospel for his own ministry. Nevertheless, the
summaries speak of a universal salvation, and the experience Paul describes
is shared by others—or should be! Christ died for alU so that all might live
for him, 33 and living for him means offering the message of reconciliation
to others and serving as instruments of God's righteousness. Christ became
sin for us, in order that we might become the righteousness of God, and
that "we" can hardly be exclusive! The new creation embraces all who are
in Christ. Becoming God's righteousness is not just a matter of being
acquitted in God's court or of sharing Christ's status before God. If God's
righteousness is a restorative power, bringing life and reconciliation, then
those who "become righteousness" will be the means of manifesting that
power in the world. The "we" in v. 21b, which has particular significance
for Paul's own understanding of discipleship and ministry, becomes an
invitation to others to share in the divine activity. What Christ is to us—
righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, redemption—Christians must now
be to the world.