In John 21:15 the RSV and the NRSV translate Jesus s question to Peter:
"Do you love me more than these?"; the KJV and the Webster: "Lovest thou
me more than these?"; the God s Word version: "Do you love me more than
the other disciples do?"; the Italian CEI Bible: "Mi ami tu più di costoro?" 1
The Greek is: Λέγει τω Σίμωνι Πέτρω ό Ίησοΰς, Σίμων Ιωάννου, άγαπας με
πλέον τούτων; λέγει αύτφ· vai Κύριε, συ οιδας οτι φιλώ σε.
As may be seen e.g. from the critical apparatus of A. Merks edition, 2 the
problematic words πλέον τούτων, which appear only at the end of the first
of the three questions, are omitted by some Greek minuscule manuscripts.
And in Peter s answer, immediately following Jesus s first question, the rel­
evant bit is dropped altogether: ναί Κύριε, συ οίδας οτι φιλώ σε, not πλέον
τούτων. This construct, πλέον + genitive, is also employed in John 7:31,
whereas in John 4:1 we find the alternative, disambiguating form with ή.
The main problem with current translations and the most widespread
4
interpretation is the absence of an emphatic subject in the sentence; for
there is no "you" (σύ) expressed, which makes it strongly implausible that
Jesus is contrasting Peter, the subject of the phrase, to the other disciples as
the one who loves Jesus more than the others do. Thus, Bernard 5 proposes
the translation: "Lovest thou me more than these things?," and explains:
"This interpretation is, indeed, unattractive, but it may possibly be right,
and it is free from some difficulties which beset the usual interpretation. At
any rate, Peter in his reply takes no notice of πλέον τούτων." Ignace de la
Potterie, 6 who considered John 21 to have been written by the author of
the rest of the Gospel, 7 likewise suggested that we should translate "Ami me
più di queste cose?" ("Do you love me more than you love these things?").
The emphasis is not on the subject (Peter vs. the other disciples), but on
the object, and the comparison is between that object ("me," Jesus) and
other things, all the rest, for in Greek τούτων may well be a neuter ("these
things," the things you see all around, the things of "this world," which in
8
John is opposed to the other as this κόσμος vs. the αιών). Peter should love
Jesus more than anything else, so he should even die for him. This is why
Jesus predicts his martyrdom soon after.
I shall endeavour to buttress this interpretation with further arguments.
9
Raymond Brown observes that Luke 5:1-11 supports it, inasmuch as it
presents Peter as one who left everything else to follow Jesus. Indeed, I find
that this passage provides an excellent parallel to the one under investiga­
tion here, both for its meaning and for the use of πάντα in it to indicate all
the realities to which Peter prefers Jesus, just as in our Johannine passage a
very similar neutral plural, ταΰτα, in my interpretation designates all the
realities to which Peter prefers Jesus. Brown also remarks that it would be
normal to repeat the verb in this case, but I think that this would be only
if John had chosen the πλέον ή formula (άγαπας με πλέον ή [άγαπας]
ταΰτα / τούτους); with πλέον τούτων it is unnecessary, or rather incorrect,
to repeat the verb. Brown also points out that a choice between material
things and the risen Jesus would be ridiculous, but it is precisely the choice
between Jesus and all the rest in the world, including his own life, that
leads Peter to total service and martyrdom. A further point by the same
scholar against the traditional reading is illuminating, and strengthens de
la Potteries interpretation: it is inconceivable that in this Gospel Peter
should be held up as an example of greater love in comparison to the oth­
ers, not only because this would suggest a rivalry among the disciples,
opposed by Jesus in Mark 9:34-35 and 10.-42-44, 10 but also and above all
because in the fourth Gospel pre-eminence in love seems to be the pre­
rogative of the beloved disciple, usually identified with John the evange­
list. 11 We shall see that, precisely because of this problem, there have been
attempts to distinguish pre-eminence in loving and in being loved (but John
Chrysostom found that, if Peter were the most loving, he would also be the
most beloved). 12 Some scholars feel that the translation "Do you love me
more than the others do?" would be possible only in an ironic sense. 13
Rudolf Bultmann 14 resolved the problem by taking πλέον τούτων as
being a mere editorial attempt to include the other disciples in the frame
ofJesuss questions linking w. 1-13 and 15-17. Richard Bauckham 15 does
not address the question directly, 16 but does comment on the scene, and,
like several Fathers, underlines the correspondence between Peter s threefold
denial and the threefold pledge of love which Jesus now requires, also
stressing that loving Jesus will mean giving his own life for him. He draws
a distinction between Peter s role as a shepherd and that of the beloved
disciple as a perceptive witness. 17
While some commentators do not even mention the exegetical option I
propose for John 21:15 18 ("Do you love me more than you love these
things?"), others at least take into account the possibility of rendering
Jesus's words in this sense, 19 but often in a rather restricted way, assuming
that τούτων simply refers to the fisherman's life, 20 whereas I think that it
refers to all things, this world in general vs. Jesus.
Two main grammatical and syntactical points, in addition to philologi­
cal and exegetical attestations which I shall discuss later, strongly buttress
my argument. They concern the πλέον τούτων formula and the absence of
an expressed σύ in John 21:15.
A methodical analysis of the Greek usage within 21 and outside the NT
demonstrates that the genitive after πλέον can correspond to any case in
the full form with ή, not only the nominative. 22 So, e.g. in the 1st cen­
tury 23 in the Letter of Aristeas 91.3 we have προήγαγον πλέον σταδίων
τεσσάρων, corresponding to an accusative (πλέον ή στάδια τέσσαρα or
σταδίους τεσσάρους); in the early 2nd century πλέον τούτου is used by
Ignatius Ep. 2.10.1 instead of the full formula with a dative: αλλω ονόματι
καλείται πλέον τούτου, where the disambiguating formula would read
πλέον ή τούτω. 24 Again in the 2nd century, in Nicomachus, 25 έπί πλέον
τούτων corresponds to επί πλέον ή επί ταΰτα. Similarly, in a late author
such as Tzetzes, 26 the syntagm under investigation corresponds to εις
πλέον ή εις ταΰτα. In Theodoretus 27 the construct corresponds to πλέον ή
τούτων, in Psellus 28 to πλέον ή τούτοις. In Asterius, Horn. 1.7, too, the
genitive corresponds to an accusative (πλέον η τούτους): Δαιμονώντα καλώ
τον ψεύστην καί βλάσφημον, και πλέον τούτων τον πόρνον. Thus, in our
Johannine passage πλέον τούτων may easily correspond to πλέον ή τούτους
or ταΰτα, certainly not only to πλέον ή ούτοι.
Moreover, when the genitive in πλέον τούτων and in similar pronominal
constructs corresponds to an accusative in the disambiguating formula,
it mostly corresponds to the neuter, πλέον ή ταΰτα. An example of
genitive hiding a neutral form is provided, between the late first and early
second century, by Plutarch, Quaest. Plat. 1008C, 29 where πλέον εκείνων
corresponds to πλέον ή εκείνα, but already in Herodotus we find two
examples, in which both occurrences of πλέον τούτων—the same phrase as
in John—correspond to πλέον ή ταΰτα. 30 Even more important, in ουδέν
πλέον τούτων αιτήσει (Basilius Med. Virg. 721.9), in the equivalent πλέον
ή ταΰτα, ταΰτα would be an accusative, just as in our Johannine passage.
And the same is the case in Cyril of Jerusalem, Catech. 15.24.18: πλέον
τούτων ειπείν ουκ ήδύνατο ό προφήτης (= πλέον ή ταΰτα, ace); John
Chrysostom, Ad pop. Ant. PG 49.107.34: Έχω τι και πλέον τούτων ειπείν
(= πλέον ή ταΰτα, ace); Exp. in Ps. PG 55.356.3: Tí πλέον τούτων βούλει;
(= πλέον ή ταΰτα, ace.) and eighteen other occurrences in John and later
authors. 31 There are in all more than twenty instances recorded in which
πλέον τούτων corresponds to πλέον ή ταΰτα, accusative. A lexicon even
takes up precisely John 21:15 as an example for the accusative construc­
tion of αγαπάω, thus suggesting that it considers τούτων there as standing
also for an accusative: Lexicon syntacticum (e codd. Barocciano
57 + Canonic, gr. 41) A 275.14: αγαπώ το αρκώ· δοτική·... αγαπώ το
φιλώ· αιτιατική· άγαπας με πλέον τούτων;
In fact, in the whole corpus of Greek literature recorded in the TLG, the
πλέον τούτων construct is attested several times in addition to John 21:15,
from Herodotus—with the two abovementioned occurrences—to Patris­
tic and Byzantine authors, with a clear prevalence in later texts: remark­
ably, most of them stand for πλέον ή ταΰτα (accusative), exactly as I think
it is the case in John 21:15. 32 Another substantial group of occurrences of
the πλέον τούτων construct appear precisely in quotations of our Johan-
nine passage, from John Chrysostom to Cyril of Alexandria, the Catenae,
and Photius. 33
But the most compelling and decisive case of all is provided by John 7:31,
the only other passage in the Johannine Gospel where the πλέον + genitive
construct appears: it corresponds to a πλέον ή + a neutral plural accusative,
exactly as in John 21:15. For in Μή πλείονα σημεία ποιήσει ων ούτος
έποίησεν; the expression πλείονα ων corresponds to πλείονα ή α (accusa­
tive). In the light of this systematic investigation it seems very likely that in
John 21:15 πλέον τούτου corresponds to πλέον ή ταΰτα.
I observe further that the absence of an expressed σύ, which makes it
extremely difficult to place the emphasis on the subject, plainly contrasts
Johns grammatical use, where we always find the nominative personal pro­
noun whenever the stress lies on it as a subject (I found 132 occurrences of
εγώ, most of which obviously referring to Jesus; 61 of σύ, 18 of ημείς,
68 of ύμεις); the nominative pronoun is sometimes expressed even when it is
not emphasised (e.g. 4:35; 5:20, 33; 7:35; 11:27; 15:3), and in certain
cases it is accompanied by αυτός for further stress (e.g. 3:28). Also in the
rest of the New Testament (where e.g. σύ occurs 170 times, ύμεις 236,
ημείς 127) it is evident that, when subject personal pronouns are not
expressed, there is absolutely no emphasis on the subject; otherwise they
are always expressed, even when no stress lies on the subject, 34 and this is
especially the case in the Gospel of John. Moreover, in allocutions σύ
is practically always expressed. Thus, it is all the more striking that in
John 21:15 σύ is not expressed: this means that the emphasis here definitely
cannot lie on the subject; it must lie on the object, με: this form in the N T
is used much more frequently than έμέ (293 occurrences vs. 90) and is
often employed emphatically instead of έμέ; 35 remarkably, in John we
always find με depending on άγαπαν, 36 even if the emphasis lies on the
object, as in 14:15, 21, 23, 24, 28; 15:9, and precisely 21:15. And πλέον
τούτων is a comparison concerning the object of Peters love.
The ancient versions and the Fathers, too, definitely support the reading
I propose. The Vg reads: "Simon Iohannis diligis me plus his? dicit ei etiam
Domine tu seis quia amo te." There are no significant variant readings for
the VL, but the words plus his, probably felt as problematic, are remarkably
omitted in six mss. among the most ancient. 37 The Latin is a faithful trans-
lation of the Greek and maintains the ambiguity of the original, but it is
highly significant that it does not render "diligis me tu plus quam hi /
isti?," nor "diligis me plus quam hos / istos." Instead, it omits tu, which
renders it very difficult to place the emphasis on the subject—all the more
in that, in all other cases, the Vg expresses the nominative pronoun when-
ever it is emphasised, closely following the Greek original and even express-
ing it more frequently than the Greek does ^1 found 160 occurrences of
ego; 64 of tu; 19 of nos; 107 of vos)—, and maintains his, which may be
either masculine or neuter. Thus, it is perfectly possible to translate the
Vg too as follows: "Do you love me more than these things?" Likewise, in
the answer we do not read: "Tu seis quia ego te amo," but "Tu seis quia amo
te? The emphasis is again on the object.
Only one remarkable exception is found in the Latin column of the
Bezae Codex Cantabrigiensis, 38 fol. 181a: "Simon Iohannis diligis me plus
quam istos." 39 According to this interpretation, Jesus asks Peter whether he
loves him more than he loves the other disciples. From the grammatical
point of view, this is possible, and this interpretation too was proposed by
some Fathers, and in 1940 by A. Fridrichsen. The difficulty rather lies with
the meaning: as Brown noticed, 40 it is hard to believe that the Johannine
writer really proposes the possibility of a choice between the other disciples
and the resurrected Jesus.
The Syriac too, like the Latin—apart from the Bezae Codex—, strongly
supports the interpretation I propose. The Sinaitic codex (5th century), 41
like some other Greek and Latin manuscripts mentioned above, omits the
42
problematic words corresponding to "more than these" and simply reads
atv. 15b: >A )&ΛΓ< *μ*\ ^ιο_ιη CTVLD , ^ α \ *7ix, "Simon son of John, do
you love mei" It is to be noticed that the pronoun "me" is expressed
emphatically, not as a simple attachment to the verb "pAii, so as to produce
piAii, but with a preposition of its own, >A, as though Jesus were saying:
43
"Is it I whom you love?" The same is the case, both in Jesuss question
and in Peter's answer, in the Peshitta and the Harklean versions, which do
have the words corresponding to "more than these." The Peshitta reads:
^ilm ^73 T-ikl μ iort'^An rdJO_i sL· ^OJ^TLT ("Simon son of John,
is it I whom you love? more than these?") and the Harklean version has:
^ c u c b ^73 î-j^Ui y\ fcv-irf >Aii rÉJO-ι T3 , ^ η ν ^nx (idem). And in
Peter s answer we find the same stress on the object again, with the prepo­
sitional construction and not simply the addition of the pronoun at the
φ
9
li 9
end of the verb: try rdirt' > * i (Peshitta); \r\ Γ(ΛΓ< > Α Π (Harklean); so
we can translate: "I love you," "It is you whom I love."
Both of these versions fully confirm the translation here proposed, in
that they stress the object "me" rather than the subject "you"—which in
Syriac must always be expressed, whereas in the Greek text it is omitted—
and they leave the possibility open to taking the pronoun "these" or "them"
(^acn, ^curb) as referring to both things and persons. Thus, they can be
rendered: "Do you love me more than these things?" So, too, the text of
the Sinaitic codex allows us to translate: "Do you love mèi? "Is it I whom
you love?"
Furthermore, the Coptic Version (Sahidic), 44 like the Latin and Syriac
translations, clearly supports the interpretation I am suggesting, given that
in the question "Do you love me more than these (things)?" it has no pro-
noun "you" at all, and the emphasis rather lies on the object "me," which
is not simply attached to the verb, but placed in a prepositional construct
of its own: ciMCüN ntpHpe ÑICÜSANNHC ΚΜΘ MMOI e 2 o y e NAL Thus, the
meaning is: "Simon son of John, do you love me more than these (things)?"
In fact, the Coptic pronoun ΝΑΙ may refer to both things and persons.
Notably, too, both in the other two questions of Jesus and in all three
answers of Peter the subject is not at all expressed and the object is empha­
sized in the very same prepositional construct: KM6 MMOI (twice): "Do you
love me?," "Is it I whom you love?," and: \n& MMOK (thrice), "I love you"
"It is you whom I love."
Thus, the Latin, Syriac, and Coptic versions fully support the interpre­
tation I suggest. The understanding of the Church Fathers too is worth
investigating in this connection.
Early authors rarely allude to this passage, and still less frequently do
they mention the difficult phrase "more than these": either they did not
read it in their manuscripts, or they did not attach importance to it, or else
they felt uncomfortable with it. In the 2nd century, this is the case of Apol-
linaris of Hierapolis, 45 who, in fragment 155 on John 21:15-17, mentions
Jesuss question about Peters love, omitting the bit concerning the com­
parison. He rather stresses that Jesus trusts his flock to Peter but he remains
its true shepherd, and emphasizes the correspondence between Jesus s three
questions and Peters threefold denial, an exegesis that was destined to
become widespread. 46 Notably, Apollinaris links Jesuss questions concerning
Peter s love for him to his prediction of Peter s martyrdom: Την ετι μείζω
της αγάπης άπόδειξιν την δια του μαρτυρίου φησίν αυτόν ποιήσεσθαι...
την μέχρι θανάτου μαρτυρίαν περί του Κυρίου την πρότερον δια θανάτου
φόβον άρνησιν γενομένην άπαλείψειεν, "He says he will offer an even
greater proof of his love: through his martyrdom... his witness to the Lord
rendered through his death will wipe away his denial due to his fear of
death" (fr. 156 on John 21:18-19). Dying as a martyr for Jesuss sake
47
implies that Peter must love Jesus more than all the rest.
In Letter 2.1 included in the Epistolary of Cyprian (first half of the
3rd century), from the Roman to the Carthaginian clergy, there is a quota­
tion from John 21:15-17 with no mention of the plus his phrase, which
may be due to the problematic nature of this expression, or to its absence
in the Biblical text used (we have seen that several Latin manuscripts omit
it). The short dialogue is commented on as follows: "This saying arose out
of the very circumstance of his withdrawal, and the rest of the disciples did
likewise." Significandy, all that is stressed here is just the similarity between
Peter and the other disciples, not a difference.
In a fragment on Proverbs from the Catenae (PG 17.184C11) Origen
mentions John 21:15-17 in his discussion of the gradations of love, as a
proof that αγάπη is greater than φιλία. He quotes Jesuss questions, but he
too leaves out the puzzling πλέον τούτων expression. And one passage sug­
gests that Origen understood the words άγαπας με πλέον τούτων as "Do
you love me more than these things?" meaning "all the rest vs. Christ": in
Co. Ro. 1.1-12.21, from the Catenae, 28.10, Origen states that, if we have
no θεοσέβεια, then πάντα μάλλον ή Θεον άγαπώμεν, "we love everything
more than we love God," the exact reverse of άγαπας με πλέον τούτων, "do
you love me more than you love these things?" with emphasis on the object,
strongly confirming my understanding. Origen goes on to say that we
ought to love God more than all the rest, because "love has no other proper
and principal object but God himself" (άγάπην την ούδενος έτερου κυρίως
ή αύτοΰ του Θεοΰ τυγχάνουσαν, 28.12). Jesus died to constitute Gods love
in us (ibid.); 48 thus, whoever loves God more than all the rest will be ready
for martyrdom, like Peter. 49
In the 4th century Epiphanius, Panarion 59.1.6 (2.364.16-18) draws a
parallel between Peter's three denials and Jesus s three questions addressed
to him, which he loosely quotes: notably, from the first he drops the prob­
lematic πλέον τούτων expression. 50 Ibid. 59.8.2 (2.373.14) he mentions
John 21:15-17asa compensation for Peters denials and an invitation to
repentance for all. The correspondence between the threefold denial and
the threefold confession is also pointed out by Cyril of Jerusalem, Cath.
ad ilium. 14.23 (1138.25), who alludes to John 21:15, but again with no
mention of the tricky πλέον τούτων phrase.
Still in the 4th century, Basil, Reg. mor. 70.18-19, speaking about what
is required to love the Lord, i.e. loving those who are being instructed and
caring about them even with willingness to die, 51 quotes John 10:11 and
21:15, including πλειον τούτων (sic). He comments that loving Christ
means loving the others and being ready to suffer martyrdom for him, but
nothing is said about loving Jesus more than others do, which suggests that
Basil did not understand πλειον τούτων as "more than these do." To Basil
is also ascribed a Commentary on Isaiah where Jesus s prophecy of Peter's
martyrdom is mentioned (μαρτύριον μέχρι θανάτου, 3.131), but without
reference to Jesuss questions. At 5.169 the author summarizes Jesuss ques­
tions into one, without πλέον τούτων. Another Cappadocian, Gregory
Nazianzen, in Or. 39.18, in the context of a defence of forgiveness, con­
nects Peter's three denials to Jesus's three questions, which are interpreted
as a correction of the former, a therapy (έθεράπευσεν), and forgiveness; the
perfection of this therapy is seen in Peter's martyrdom, here referred to via
the mention of his blood: "Don't you forgive Peter even if brought to
perfection through his blood?" (Ή ουδέ τελειωθέντα δέχη δι' αίματος;).
Gregory does not address the πλέον τούτων problem; however, both he and
Basil link Peter's love for Jesus to his martyrdom, a bond essential to the
interpretation of πλέον τούτων I propose: only loving Jesus more than all
the rest can make a Christian martyr.
Similarly, Theodore of Mopsuestia, Co. Io. fr. 139 does not mention
the puzzling comparison, but insists on Peters love for Christ, on the
correspondence between his three denials and three confessions, and on
Jesuss prediction of Peter's martyrdom as a consequence of his steadfast­
53
ness in his love for Jesus. Ambrose alludes to John 21:15 several times,
especially in Luc. 10.176 (397.1692); in Fid. 5.2 he simply mentions the
correspondence between Peter's denials and confessions of love, just as in
Spin 2.10.105, where Ambrose also relates them to the mystery of the
Trinity, and Spir. 2.13.146 (144.43), and in Hilarius, Trin. 637, where,
again, there is no mention of comparisons.
John Chrysostom, a fellow disciple of Theodore at the school of Dio­
dore of Tarsus, in his Homily 77 on John (PG 59.477-480) quotes our text
twice, both times including πλέον τούτων, which he interprets as "more
than the other disciples." Thus, this interpretation first appears only around
AD 400. John wonders why Peter has such a special role: Peter is "elected
among the apostles" (εκκριτος τών αποστόλων) because Jesus wishes to
show that he is forgiven for his denial, and thus he gives him a position of
pre-eminence, but for martyrdom, not for glory. 54 Chrysostom, like Basil,
Nazianzen, and Theodore, does not forget that the direct consequence of
Peter's love for Jesus is martyrdom: Ειπών δε αύτφ περί της εις αυτόν
αγάπης, προαγορεύει αύτφ και το μαρτύριον... βουλωμένος καί παιδεΰσαι
ήμας, ποίφ δει τρόπφ μάλιστα αυτόν άγαπαν, "After speaking to him about
the love for him, he predicts him his martyrdom... also in order to teach us
how we should love him above all" (which is close to my interpretation).
In the first half of the 5th century, Cyril of Alexandria quotes John 21:15
including πλέον τούτων, 55 which he likewise interprets as "more than the
other disciples do," but with less stress on martyrdom. Cyril insists from
the beginning on Peter s pre-eminence, and for this reason he connects the
present episode to others indicating such pre-eminence, the confession of
faith in Caesarea Philippi and Peters defence of Jesus in the Gethsemane.
This is why των άλλων γοργότερον προσάγει την πεΰσιν, εί πλειον αυτών
άγαπα, και τούτο εις τρίτον, "He asked him more vibrantly the question
whether he loves him more than they do, and this thrice." But he also
proposes a deeper (την κεκρυμμένην... διερευνήσαι διάνοιαν) and more
personal interpretation (οΐμαι δε εγωγε): if the three questions are addressed
only to Peter, when all of the twelve have already received the apostolic mis­
sion, it is because only he had denied Jesus thrice. He has obtained a greater
forgiveness than the others: this is why he must love Jesus more than the
others (πλείονα τών άλλων την αφεσιν κομισάμενος, έξαιτειται λέγειν εί και
πλειον άγαπα). 56 The particular address to Peter indicates the renewal of his
apostolic mission, implying martyrdom as a perfect proof of love.
Augustine provides an interpretation that strongly supports my under­
standing. In his homilies on John 57 123.4-5, while commenting on the
words "diligis me plus his," he insists much more on the object "me" than
on the unexpressed subject, and with no mention of a comparison with the
others' love. Augustine, in accord to his contrast between amor sut usque
ad contemptum Dei and amor Dei usque ad contemptum sui, opposes loving
Christ to loving oneself and the other things in the world:
Qui hoc animo pascunt oves Christi ut suas velint esse non Christi, se convincuntur
amare, non Christum, vel gloriandi... non obediendi et subveniendi et Deo placendi
caritate... apostolus gémit sua quaerere non quae Iesu Christi. Nam quid est aliud,
Diligis me? Pasce oves meas, quam si diceretur, Si me diligis, non te pascere cogita, sed
oves meas sicut meas pasce, non sicut tuas; gloriam meam in eis quaere, non tuam;
dominium meum, non tuum; lucra mea, non tua, ne sis in eorum societate qui perti-
nent ad tempora periculosa, seipsos amantes, et caetera quae huic malorum initio
connectuntur? Cum enim dixisset apostolus: Erunt enim homines seipsos amantes,
secutus adiunxit: Amatores pecuniae, elati... Haec omnia mala ab eo velut fonte
manant, quod primum posuit: seipsos amantes. Merito dicitur Petro: Diligis mei
Et respondet: Amo te... Non ergo nos, sed ipsum amemus.
Those who have this purpose in feeding the flock of Christ, that they may have them
as their own, and not as Christ s, are convicted ofbving themselves, not Christ, from the
desire either of boasting..., not from the love of obeying, serving, and pleasing God...
The apostle complains that they seek their own, not the things that arefesus Christs. For
what else mean the words, "Do you love me? Feed my sheep," than if it were said, If
you love me, think not of feeding yourself, but feed my sheep as mine, not as your own-,
seek my glory in them, not your own; my dominion, not yours-, my gain, not yours-, lest
you be found in the fellowship of those who belong to the perilous times, lovers of their
own selves, and all else that is joined on to this beginning of evils? For the apostle, after
saying, "For men shall be lovers of their own selves" added, "Lovers of money, boast­
ful ..." All these evils flow from that as their fountain which he stated first, lovers of
their own selves. With great propriety, therefore, is Peter addressed, 'Do you love meY
and found replying, Ί love you ... Let us, then, love not ourselves, but Him. (§ 5)
This implies that Augustine interpreted the sentence in this way: "Do you
love me more than you love anything else in the world (including your­
self)?" Indeed, he adds: "Quisquís seipsum, non Deum amat, non se amat;
et quisquís Deum, non seipsum amat, ipse se amat," "For everyone who
loves himself, not God, does not love himself; whoever loves God, not him-
self, loves himself." Augustine's understanding of our passage clearly sup-
ports its interpretation as "Simon son of John, do you love me more than
you love these things?"
Thomas Aquinas in his commentary on John (2617-2626) 58 endorses
the interpretation "Do you love me more than these do?," although he
realizes that Jesus s questions prepare the prediction of Peter s martyrdom
and that both Peter and John have a pre-eminence in love. 59 He also notices
that plus his is dropped in Peters answer because "Peter humiliates himself
in front of the other apostles" (2621). A similar remark is found in
Bonaventuras commentary on John (21.32; 21.37): 60 after noting that
there was requested of Peter a maior dilectio (21.31), 61 he points out that
he does not answer that he loves Jesus more, because he cannot know the
others' love ("respondit... non quod plus amet, quia amorem aliorum
nesciebat"); nevertheless, Jesus did ask him that question, both to show his
love and to correct Peter. 62 Bonaventura also introduces the comparison
with Peter's denials (21.36). 63
Eckhart 64 investigates the passage at stake closely and at great length, in
his commentary on John, 21.720-737, where he also provides the interpre-
tation I support. He observes (21.726) that "diligis me plus his?" can
be understood as: 1) "Do you love me more than these do?," because
the priest, entrusted with the care of others, must love God more than
the others do (21.720); 2) "Do you love me more than you love these
persons?," which Eckhart connects with Matt 10:37; 19:29; 22:37-39
(21.727); 3) "Do you love me more than you love these?," that is, "well,
but not yet perfectly," because "in the One there is neither gradation nor
order"; thus, "whoever loves God more than the others, loves God well,
but not perfectly, since he does not love God in the others nor the others
in God. For, if he loved them in this way, he would love one and the same
thing" (21.728). Interpretations 2) and 3), with emphasis on the object,
resemble that which I propose, with the only difference that Eckhart takes
his in plus his as masculine, but immediately offering a mystical explana-
tion, for he refuses to establish gradations in loving: perfection is beyond
gradation. Moreover, Eckhart, like Augustine and Aquinas, notes (21.729)
that Peter does not declare that he loves Jesus more than the others do
"in order not to place himself before the others" and because he could
not know the others' love (Eckhart quotes Prov 16:2 and 1 Cor 2:11).
Furthermore, it is God who infuses love in our hearts and is love itself
(21.731). 65
Although ancient translations and interpretations do not prove per se
that a certain exegesis of a NT passage is right, they certainly show that
it is possible to understand it in that way and that it actually was under­
stood so. Reflection on the Greek text itself and on the Johannine context
strongly supports the interpretation I propose: in John 21:15 the much
debated expression άγαπας με πλέον τούτων; ought to be interpreted
"Do you love me more than you love these things?," i.e. all the rest. Con­
siderations concerning grammar—primarily the absence of an expressed
σύ and the frequently attested use of πλέον τούτων in the sense of πλέον
ή ταΰτα (accusative), above all the only other occurrence of πλέον +
genitive in John precisely corresponding to πλέον ή + plural accusative
neuter pronoun—, Johannine, New-Testament and first-century linguistic
usage, context, meaning—especially the connection between love and
martyrdom—, ancient Biblical translations into Latin, Coptic, and Syriac,
and several Patristic interpretations and significant omissions, all point to
this conclusion.