New Testament scholars almost universally accept that Hellenistic influences
exclusively lie behind instructions to husbands, wives, parents, children
and slaves. This is so much the case that it is zfait accompli that Greek
influences are completely responsible for the form and content of these
so-called New Testament "household codes" (e.g. Col 3-4; Eph 5-6). In
light of newer Jewish documents, particularly 4QInstruction (4Q415-418,
423; 1Q26), however, this position should be re-evaluated. Although Hel-
lenistic tradition remains important, Jewish interpretive traditions are
potentially relevant to the study of New Testament Haustafeln as well.
Before addressing the importance of 4QInstruction, however, we must first
comment on the relevant passages of Philo. Until now, they proved to be
one of the closest Jewish parallels to the form of instruction to family
members in the New Testament. Philo has long been discussed in regard to
household codes because he finds the fifth commandment of the Deca-
logue, to honor one's father and mother, as a natural point of departure for
discussing marriage and child rearing and, moreover, groups family mem-
bers in distinct pairs. 2
More specifically, Philos treatise on the Decalogue 165-167 (cf. Despee.
Leg. 11.225-227) is arguably one of the closest parallels to New Testament
instruction directed at the family. In Philo s discourse on the Decalogue, he
describes how groups of pairs are subordinate to one another. He suggests
that honoring parents helps one understand how to deal with relations
between old and young, ruler and subjects, as well as slave to master. Philo s
interest in pairs also leads him to comment more broadly on the subjuga-
tion of children and the young.
Significant for the discussion about influences on Philo when he inter-
prets the fifth commandment, in the late-1950s David Schroeder argued
that Philo s ethic derived from the Decalogue within a Jewish Hellenistic
context. 3 This was, in fact, a break from previous research on Haustafeln
and never gained broad acceptance in scholarly circles. 4 Schroeder draws
parallels between Philo and the New Testament, especially in Colossians
and Ephesians. More recently, Mariis Gielen has supported the conclusion
of Schroeder based on a stylistic argument about apodictic law. Direct
exhortations in household codes are seen to derive from the laws of the
Hebrew Bible, and she suggests readers of the New Testament would have
turned to the Septuagint in order to understand such teachings. 5
In the last decades David Balch has made significant contributions
to understanding influences on both the form and content of family codes
in New Testament writings. 6 Similar to a number of his predecessors on
the subject, Balch draws attention to the significance of the fifth com­
mandment in Philo as a parallel to New Testament instruction. Of par­
ticular significance is the following passage in Philos Special Laws {De spec.
Leg. 11.224-227):
/ now proceed to the fifth, which states the duty of honouring parents, a matter of which, as
I have shewn in the discussion devoted to this in particular, stana on the border-line
between [μεθόριον] the human and the divine? For Parents are midway between the
nature of God and man, and partake of both; the human obviously because they have
been born and will perish, the divine because they have brought others to the [sic]
birth and have raised not-being into being. Parents, in my opinion, are to their chil­
dren what God is to the world, since just as he achieved existence for the non-existent, so
they in imitation of His power, asfar as they are capable, immortalize the race. And a
father and mother deserve honour, not only on this account, but for many other reasons?
For in the judgement of those who take account of virtue, seniors are placed above
juniors, teachers above pupils, benefactors above beneficiaries, rulers above subjects,
and masters above servants. Now parents are assigned a place in the higher of these two
orders, for they are seniors and instructors and benefactors and rulers and masters:
sons and daughters are placed in the lower order, for they are juniors and learners and
9
recipients of benefits and subjects and servants.
In this passage, Philo sets views on pairs within a framework comparing
parents with God. Balch concludes that when Philo interprets the fifth
commandment it is "in light of Platonic and Aristotelian political ethics." 10
Balch focuses considerable attention on three pairs of relationships—
master/slave; husband/wife; father/children—which he views ultimately as
Aristotelian political ideals passed down from the Peripatetics, outlined by
Arius Didymus, rejected by Philodemus and known to Cicero and Philo.
Indeed, so pervasive are these political ideas that Balch concludes "Philo
used them to interpret the Old Testament Decalogue!" 11
James Crouch is another contributor to the conversation who merits
attention. He concludes that family ethics in the New Testament were
significantly influenced by oriental Judaism. 12 Like Schroeder, Crouch
finds the Jewish Hellenistic (esp. in Ps.-Phocylides and Philo) expression of
the form of this ethic to be distinctive. However, unlike Schroeder, Crouch
does not view New Testament family ethics as having developed from the
Decalogue. Indeed, he comments on Philo s use of the fifth command­
ment that it provides him with "his best opportunity to press the Stoic
καθήκον schema into the service of the Jewish Torah." 13
Schroeder, Balch, Crouch and Gielen have each offered appraisals of
traditions that influenced Philo. Schroeder and subsequently Gielen sug­
gest that family ethics grow out of the fifth commandment. Balch finds
Platonic and Aristotelian political ideas behind Philos interpretation of the
Decalogue and, thus, does not find significant Jewish influence on New
Testament family ethics. Crouch, finding Stoic influence on Philo s inter­
pretation of the Decalogue, minimizes the commandment s significance
and argues that New Testament ethics are heavily influenced by a conjectured
Jewish oriental missionary source. For Crouch and Balch, reflection on the
fifth commandment is not where family ethics derived, but rather the
command served as a convenient departure point for Philo to expound
upon ideals gleaned from well-known Greek sources.
Scholars have often commented and disagreed with Schroeder s conclu­
sions about the background of New Testament instruction to family mem­
bers. Most recently, Gielen has supported the thesis of Schroeder, but her
work has been sharply criticized and does not appear to have been persua­
sive. 14 For the present conversation, the issue is not whether form and
content are influenced by Greek discussions on οικονόμοι and follow
Greek schémas, but rather whether Jewish Palestinian influences could ako
be viewed as exerting influence on family ethics. 15 Accordingly, when we
demonstrate that Philo s interpretation of the fifth commandment may
reflect a Jewish interpretive tradition such as attested in 4QInstruction, it
becomes necessary to rethink the intellectual background to New Testa-
ment Haustafeln.
Before we compare Philos interpretation of the fifth commandment with
that of 4QInstruction, some relevant background information needs to be
given. 4QInstruction is the longest document of its kind among the Dead
Sea Scrolls. It shares characteristics of "traditional" wisdom and apocalyp-
tic genres. 16 As the title of the document suggests, it is concerned with
instruction about how to conduct oneself in both a this-worldly and other-
worldly way. 17 Regarding the latter, the one addressed is exhorted how to
behave towards angelic beings and gain esoteric hidden wisdom (rVHJ Π).
Instruction related to this-worldly behavior teaches about how family
members should relate to each other as well as financial issues, such as
debt. As we shall see, both aspects of the documents theology are impor­
tant for our evaluation of influences on Philo.
4QInstruction was likely composed in the 3rd century BCE. The docu­
ment is written in Hebrew and survives in at least eight manuscripts, how­
ever these manuscripts taken together preserve less than 40% of the
document. Although the work clearly indicates that the addressee has an
elect status, there is no reason to classify it as deriving from the "Essene"
community. Indeed, the opinio communis is that 4QInstruction should be
categorized as a "pre-Essene" (or "non-Essene") work based, in large part,
on the conjectured date of composition and absence of distinctive termi­
nology. 18 Furthermore, although the document is not preserved outside of
Qumran, there is no reason to conclude that it could not have been circu­
lated more broadly in Palestinian Jewish communities.
The part of the document that is most relevant for the present conver­
sation is 4Q416 2 iii lines 15-19. This passage belongs to the largest
fragment of 4QInstruction which preserves large parts of four columns
(4Q416 2 i-iv). In the latter two columns of this fragment, teachings occur
about how members of the family should relate to one another. Not only
is the fifth commandment rewritten, but there are also numerous allusions
to Gen 2-3, which will be commented on further below. Allusions to
these portions of the creation narrative figure significantly in instruction to
both husbands and fathers concerning the taking of a wife or giving of a
daughter. 19
An interest in relations between husbands and wives as well as parents
and children in 4QInstruction is not limited to 4Q416 2 ii-iv however.
4Q415 2 ii preserves a rare second person feminine singular address teach­
ing women to honor their husbands. 20 While one may construe that a
woman is directly addressed, another likely possibility is that the addressee
is told how to instruct his wife. 21 These lines may originally have been
introduced with a statement that "the understanding one should teach his
wife in this manner: 'honor [your husband] like a father' [2 ii 1; and] c do
not remove your heart[...; 2 ii 2]. Another fragment, 4Q415 11, is con-
cerned with instructing a father how to deal with a situation of giving away
a daughter and a would be son-in-law in taking a wife. This teaching
appears to be derived from reflections on Gen 2: the establishment of the
first pair and later separation of children from parents. Another notewor-
thy fragment in 4QInstruction for considering exhortations about family
relations is 4Q415 9. Although fragmentary, one may decipher a descrip-
tion of men having dominion over women (4Q415 9 8, "male having
dominion over the f [emale] ").
4QInstruction was first made available in a critical edition in 1999. 22 In
less than a decade numerous publications have been produced on the doc-
ument. Among contributions have been several that suggest the significance
for reading the New Testament. 23 One issue that has not been fully explored
is the relationship of exegetical traditions in the document with those in
the New Testament and early Jewish and Christian literature. In this regard,
not only is the interpretation of the fifth commandment in Philo relevant
as one background of family instruction in the New Testament, but also
possible roles creation traditions may have in this connection are too.
While the focus of this study is an interpretation of the Decalogue in
4QJnstruction, creation traditions surround the re-writing of the fifth com­
mandment and are an integral part of teachings to family members.
A great deal of literature is available for exploring the subject of Greco-
Roman Haustafeln and New Testament instruction to the family. To date,
however, there has been no effort to draw attention to the significance of
documents in the Qumran library to better understand possible influences
on teachings to family members in the New Testament. Perhaps one reason
for this has been the misperception that Qumran literature only represents
a minority group of monastic Jews. In the case of 4QInstruction, and more
specifically the fifth commandment in 4Q416 2 iii lines 15-19, this docu­
ment was not available to Schroeder, Balch, and Crouch for their estima­
tions of Philos use of the command.
4QInstruction invokes the fifth commandment in a way similar enough
to Philo that one may surmise they could know a common interpretation
of it. These and surrounding lines of 4QInstruction teach the addressee
how to behave in family relations and, similar to Philo s Special Laws (De
spec. Leg. 11.225-227), consider earthly parentage as an act of creation
which shares similarities with the divine. I translate and interpret these
lines as follows:
rownn rima TQD Ί Ι Λ pino nm wtà ID no vm mi υ*αη (15
Ό IDK ρ ηηΛ trrwoi irraa ρ wtò btv Ό nsni^Di naoKi (16
"IWÎOI Dilli) ρ ηηπ bv i m nm noVwon nw*ai ronin το non (17
noma ττπ[
]m nanna ]vnb mia ΓΤTM nn nsjriK rb* (18
Vacat n^D 1 » τη« Π3»η ]vnb (19
(15) Gaze and then know what is bitter for a man
and what is sweet to a man. 24
Honor your father in your low estate,
(16) and your mother in your youth.
For as God 25 is to a man so is his father,
and as angelic beings are to a man so is his mother.
For (17) they [both] are the oven of your parentage,
and as he set them in authority over you,
and fashioned you according to the spirit,
so serve them.
And as (18) he uncovered your ear to the mystery of existence,
honor them for your own honor
[
and ] venerate their presence.
(19) [Do this] for the sake of your life and length of your days.
On the one hand, a straightforward exhortation to honor father and
mother occurs in these lines, on the other, however, is an unusual analogy
that a father is like God and a mother like angelic beings (DTTND). This
analogy appears to be the basis upon which the command to honor parents
is structured.
4Q416 2 iii lines 15-19 exhort children to honor parents because as a
pair they brought them into existence. The creative act of fathers and moth­
ers is analogous to the creation of humanity by God and the angels, which
appears to be part of the documents broader theology (cf. 4Q417 1 i 15-18
and its interpretation of the plural address in Gen 1:26, "come let us make
man in our image and likeness"). 27
Philo conceives of parents as μεθόριος (see De spec. Leg. 11.224 above)
between mortal and divine while in 4Qlnstruction there is a simile of a
mother being like an angelic being. The rare occurrences of μεθόριος in
Philo describe the mediating roles of: (1) Jacob-Israel between God and
the world (e.g. De mut. Nom. 45); (2) the divine Logos between elements
of the created world and the harmony of the universe (e.g. De Phnt. 10); 28
(3) the high priest between the people Israel and God (e.g. De Somn.
11.187-188); (4) the "perfect man" between the borderline of uncreated
and corruptible (e.g. De Somn. 11.234-235); (5) the First Man with a nature
between mortal and immortal; and (6) parents. 29 Parents in Philo stand
alongside other exalted entities who serve as a boundary between mortal
and immortal natures.
Angelic beings are a crucial aspect of 4QInstructions theology and play
several important functions. They serve as role models for the addressees
because they pursue wisdom with greater diligence (4Q418 55, 69). The
addressee, who is described and reminded that he is poor, shares in a type
of heavenly wealth with angels (4Q416 2 iii). 30 Even though angelic beings
are superior to the addressee, they are inferior to God. Therefore, the com-
parison between father/mother with God/angels is a distinction between
two natures. One may conceive of angels playing a divine mediating role
in 4QInstruction as venerated beings who are subordinate to God (see esp.
4Q418 81). 31 Moreover, exhortations about how men and women are to
relate are likely part of instruction about the behavior of pairs in the docu-
ment more generally (e.g. spirit/flesh in 4Q417 1 i 15-18). 32 However, the
elect addressees in 4QInstruction are distinguished from others in the com-
munity because they achieve understanding in varying degrees. Thus, one
could summarize that when one gains wisdom vis-à-vis the cryptic mystery
of being (TXTll Π), some of the elect draw nearer than others to the
"μεθόριος" figures (= angelic beings).
Another significant theme in 4QInstruction is teaching the addressee
how to behave and relate to his wife. The lines that immediately follow the
use of the fifth commandment may be reconstructed and translated as
dealing with a wife's origins (In. 20 "in your low-estate you took a wife,
understand [her] origins") 33 and are followed by an allusion to Gen 2:18
where woman is described as mans helper (In. 21 "walk together with the
helpmeet of your flesh"). Both of these ideas—the derivation of woman
and her description as a helper—are formulated with allusions to Gen 2
and provide the backdrop for instruction that immediately follows. In a
running allusion to Gen 1-3, the author describes that: (a) a woman leaves
her mother and father and the newly married pair becomes one flesh
(4Q416 2 iv 1,4); (b) authority transfers from her mother and father to the
new husband (iv 2-4); and (c) the joining of man and woman leads to
unity or oneness with her (iv 5).
While 4Q416 2 ii-iv are among the best preserved columns in 4QIn~
struction, they are still fragmentary and at points difficult to decipher. They
appear to struggle with the role of women based on creation narratives. On
the one hand, she is a co-creator and should be honored. Although she
becomes a unity with her husband (iv 5), the author is certain to describe
that both parents and husband enjoy a superior status. Rather than an
equal she is a "helper" who leaves the protection of her parents only to be
ruled by another (iv 7, "[she is to] walk according to your pleasure"). These
lines warn against the mistreatment of women and on one occasion the
one addressed is exhorted not to "dishonor the vessel of his bosom" (4Q416
2 ii 21). Furthermore, the epithet "wife of your bosom," which occurs
twice in these lines (ropTI TWH; 2 iv 5, 12), may stress male dominance or
superiority to women. 34
Given the paucity of Jewish material from antiquity that may have
interpreted the fifth commandment but is no longer available for consid-
eration, it is feasible that Philo was aware of a Jewish tradition preserved in
a Palestinian Jewish document: 4QInstruction. Philo's comments on the
commandment could be indebted to an interpretive tradition which was
broadly known. Indeed, if this is the case then evidence from 4QInstruc-
tion should be taken into consideration when discussing family ethics in
the New Testament.
Similar to 4QInstruction, on three occasions in the New Testament (1 Cor 11;
Eph 5; 1 Tim 2) relationships between different members of the household
are discussed in the framework of Genesis creation traditions, most often
in allusion to Gen 2. 4QInstruction, in addition to elucidating a possible
tradition known in some form by Philo, provides information for evaluat-
ing the role interpretations of Genesis creation narratives play in reflecting
on the family. Two sustained allusions to creation in Eph 5 and 1 Cor 11
merit attention in this regard. 35 Shared ideas between 4QInstruction, Philo
and the New Testament illustrate that the Decalogue and Gen 2-3 were
both significant in forming traditions about the ordering of relations
between members of the family.
1 Cor 11:2-16 considers a sequence of authority beginning with Christ
to man and then from man to woman. Subjugation of woman to man is
based upon a reading of Gen 2:21-23. Man was created in the image of
God while woman was created from Adam (11:7-9). In 1 Cor 11:11-12,
the view that Adam produced Eve, but woman now bears man, is seized
upon by Paul to stress the interdependence of the genders (vs. 12 "for as
woman was made from man, so man is now born of woman").
Both Corinthians and 4QInstruction preserve similar interpretive tradi-
tions of creation: the natural order known now, that all human life comes
from woman, is an inversion of the first act of creation when woman was
begotten by the first man Adam. In 4QInstruction, the origin of woman
appears to be significant when instructing husband and wives. In this
regard, 4Q417 1 i lines 8-9 are of interest. These lines may be reconstructed
and translated as describing the separation of woman from man:
1
ΓΡΠ3 ra no** τιο rrann bx wa [ ΟΓΡ]Β;Ι)Ο[3 in] ? afro] pa pin mi iv (8
rrwn ntonni mir nni[v ]W?i no[an W]coo rropoi ÎWH ηκ uns (9
(8) ... eternity,
and then you shall know [the difference] between good and evil,
according to their deeds,
for the God of knowledge is a foundation of truth,
and by the mystery of existence (9) he separated woman,
and her deeds o..[ in all wis]dom,
and all [cra]ftiness he fashioned her,
and dominion of her deeds.. . 36
Meditation on creation in 4QInstruction results in exhorting husbands to
rule over their wives. On at least two occasions the addressee is told to have
dominion over her ( m Vwon in 4Q416 2 ii 3; ΠΠ V*1PDn in 4Q416 2 iv
2-3). Here in 4Q417 1 i, the woman could be seen as being separated from
man and fashioned. Language related to woman's deeds and dominion
over them may allude to the final phrase in Gen 3:16 that "he shall rule
over her" Cp Vwo* Kim).
References to the origin of woman (esp. 4Q416 2 iii) is also an indica­
tion that this is an important theme in 4QInstruction. In 4Q415 2 ii, where
the second person feminine singular addresses occur, are references to the
origins of woman as well (Ins. 7, 9). While the context is too fragmentary
to determine with certainty how they should be understood, it is reason­
able to consider that woman's derivation from man is the basis for instruct­
ing her. 37
Eph 5:22-33 and 4Q416 2 iii-iv both instruct husbands and wives.
There are some similarities between these two passages, the clearest parallel
being the use of Gen 2:24 (Eph 5:31; 416 2 iv 1). The pronominal suffixes
of "his" father and "his" mother are damaged beyond recognition. When
these two texts take up the idea of becoming one flesh, they separately
consider that a wife is part of the husband's body (Eph 5:28 σώματα, 416
2 iv 5 ΊΚ&). In Eph 5:30, Eve's derivation from Adam is the source of an
analogy between the church and Christ: "for we [the church] are part of his
38
[Christ's] body". Indeed, in 5:32 this is described as a mystery (μυστήριον).
One aspect of the mystery (ΓΡΓΉ Π) in 4QInstruction is a unity and yet
division between woman and man. The mystery of being in 4QInstruction is
related to meditation on the nature and order of the created cosmos, and
interpretations of creation are crucial for deciphering this mystery.
Eph 5-6 are especially significant for relating teachings to the family in
4QInstruction to those of Paul. Directly after reference to creation in chap­
ter 5, chapter 6 continues instruction to family members in connection
with the fifth commandment: "Children, obey your parents, for it is right
that you should; 'honor your father and mother' is the first commandment
with a promise attached." (6:1).
In Ephesians and 4QInstruction how men and women relate is inter­
twined with views on creation and the commandment for children to
honor their parents. Similarly, the order of creation, specifically woman's
creation after and from man, is contemplated in 1 Corinthians and Ephe­
sians for determining family roles. 39 When 4QInstruction teaches the
addressees how to relate to family members, particularly one's wife, two
biblical traditions are alluded to and rewritten: the fifth commandment
and Gen 2. That these two passages are interpreted together should come
as no surprise as they both share an interest in creation and the response of
the created to their creator(s).
As we have seen, 4QInstruction interprets the fifth commandment which
has affinities with Philo. The suggestion that Philo may know traditions
preserved in a Palestinian Jewish document, particularly a scroll from
Qumran, need not be a claim to any direct connection between them.
Particular hearers and readers would have taken interpretations with them
in the same way sea currents take flotsam and jetsam to different shores.
That the fifth commandment was used to reflect on parents as creators as
well as mediating figures between mortal and divine—and is preserved in
these two compositions—suggests that these traditions could have been
more broadly known and scattered, but only preserved in two places.
Philos interpretation of the fifth commandment could certainly be
viewed as reflecting Stoic or Aristotelian political ideals. However, he was
also familiar with Jewish traditions that interpreted biblical literature and
should not so easily be dismissed as using the Bible as a point of departure.
Moreover, Philo often seeks to demonstrate the value of biblical interpreta-
tion, in this case he appears to be engaged as an exegete who links Greek
views on pairs to a particular Jewish view on the created order and an anal-
ogy of parents as participants in the divine act of creation.
Philo s comments on the fifth commandment are seen as a crucial pre-
cursor to New Testament instruction to the family. Presently, evaluations
of Philo s comments on the Decalogue view him as being almost wholly
dependent on Hellenistic traditions. The evidence from 4QInstruction may
help us not only to better view influences on teachings about the family in
the New Testament, but also call into question that Philo, in this instance,
is Hellenizing Jewish ideas rather than Judaizing Greek ideas. At the very
least, a balanced view of the intellectual background to New Testament
Haustafeln should be one that is open to the possibility that Palestinian
exegetical traditions play a role in their formulation.