"The absence of the authors name in Lukes prologue remains mysterious
to me." 1 With this statement at the beginning of his analysis of Luke 1:1-4
E Bovon points out a critical problem that pertains to the other two Syn-
optics, the Book of Acts, and the Gospel of John as well. All five historical
books of the New Testament, including those without a prologue, were
written and published anonymously. However, this obvious fact has not
sparked much interest among New Testament scholars. The undoubtedly
secondary Gospel superscriptions have, in the wake of M. Hengel's semi-
nal work, been thoroughly scrutinized with regard to their original word-
ing, date of origin and function. 2 Yet only M. Wolter has developed a
reasonably thorough answer to the question as to why the Gospels were
originally composed without superscriptions and in particular without any
mention of the authors' names. Regarding Luke-Acts, Wolter points to
Luke 1:2 and makes the case that Lukes work was written anonymously
because, from the author's perspective, the apostolic tradition guaranteed
"its authenticity and therefore its binding authority." 3 Taking my starting
point from Wolters previous study I will try to interpret the anonymity of
the New Testament historical books against the background of the literary
conventions of history writing in ancient literature.
While most New Testament letters bear the names of their (purported)
authors (James, Jude, Paul, Peter, or at least "the Elder") the authors of the
historical books do not reveal their names. The superscriptions that include
personal names ("Gospel according to Matthew" etc.) are clearly secondary.
The author of the Coptic Gospel of Thomas, for instance, who himself
opened his work with an explicit statement of authorship, took a very
different approach. He opened his book with the words: "These are the
secret words which the living Jesus spoke, and (which) Didymus Judas
Thomas wrote." 4 In contrast, the five historical books of the New Testa-
ment were written anonymously.
C.-J. Thornton holds a view that differs from this consensus. As a result of his narra-
tological analysis he concludes that at least Luke-Acts cannot have been published
anonymously but must have mentioned the name of the author in its title. Thornton
points to the "we" passages in Acts and assumes "that the narrator of a first person
narrative has to be identifiable for the reader." Furthermore, he takes for granted that
the readers of Luke or Acts could only have known the author s name if it had been
part of the original text. 5 Yet, the original readers could also have known the authors
identity by personal relationship or oral tradition. But above all we have to take into
account that Lukes name is missing in almost all ancient manuscripts of Acts (as well
as in the early tradition) and occurs comparatively late. 6
The anonymity of the New Testament historical books is especially striking
when we consider those works that have prologues. Only the two books of
Luke-Acts (Luke 1:1-4; Acts l:lfl) have a conventional prologue in which
the author provides information about the content and purpose of his work
in the first person singular. The so-called Johannine prologue (John 1:1-18)
contains an authorial "we" (1:14.16), yet differs strongly from the common
type of historical prologues. In its conclusion John's Gospel has a state-
ment about its purpose (John 20,31: "in order that you may believe...";
cf. 19:35), but without any "I" or "we" of the author. The two final verses
of the Fourth Gospel in which both "we" (John 21:24) and "I" (John 21:25)
occur should probably be interpreted as editorial statements about the
author of the book and not as words of the author himself. 7 Whenever New
Testament narrators address their readers, whether in the first person or in some
other way, they consistently remain anonymous.
For what reason did the New Testament narrators consistently abstain
from mentioning their names? This question has rarely been addressed by
biblical scholars, and if so, quite different answers have been developed.
(1) The distinguished historian E. Meyer compared the anonymity of
the Fourth Gospel with Xenophon's claim that his Anabasis was written by
a certain Themistogenes. 8 Meyer thus interpreted the phenomenon of
anonymous historical books in the New Testament in the context of Greek
historiography. However, Greek (and Roman) historians published their
works almost exclusively under their own names. Xenophon's anonymous
(or better: pseudonymously published) work forms a special case that can
not be regarded as representative of the conventions of Greco-Roman his-
toriography.
(2) A.J.M. Wedderburn assumes that „the anonymity of the Gospels
may serve to emphasize the complete dependence of their authors on tra-
dition, rather than on any firsthand experience." 9 While this interpretation
certainly applies to the Synoptic Gospels, it fails when it comes to the
likewise anonymous Gospel of John and the Book of Acts, inasmuch the
authors of these two books appear to claim to have witnessed at least some
of the events they describe (see John 1:14; 13:23; 21:20.24 and the "we"
passages in Acts). 10 Furthermore, the question arises as to whether the
assumed relationship between the New Testament Gospels and their
sources actually may be regarded as unique or whether an anonymous han-
dling of traditions and source material was conventional in at least some
types of ancient literature.
(3) M. Wolter has interpreted the namelessness of the New Testament
historical books as a specifically Christian phenomenon. He argues that in
all the anonymous writings of the New Testament Jesus Christ is the one
and only personal authority; besides him "every human authority should
fall silent". According to Wolter, this is the reason why the New Testament
Gospels were published without mentioning their authors' names. In
the Gospel of John, the Johannine Jesus preaches "himself through his
signs and also, of course, through his speeches." Likewise, in Mark's book
"Jesus himself is the instance that authorizes the Gospel" and by this "the
individuality and authority of the author is completely surpassed and abol­
11
ished." Nevertheless, it may be asked why Paul, who explicitly appeals to
Jesus as the authority behind his message and theology (e.g. in Gal 1:1.11-
12), did not write his letters anonymously? Why did he feel free to send his
letters under his own name? And why was the Book of Acts written anon­
ymously, although, unlike the Gospels, it did not relate the words and
deeds of Jesus? It should be noted that this approach to the problem of
anonymity interprets the New Testament history books as works sui generis
and does not take into account its possible relationship to other kinds of
anonymous historiography in the ancient world. It is self-evident that
Wolters interpretation of anonymous Christian literature can by no means
be applied to anonymous books from Greco-Roman or Near Eastern lit­
erature. A closer look at the history of Greco-Roman and Old Testament
Jewish literature might offer valuable clues that could help us understand
the phenomenon of literary anonymity more precisely.
The work of a Greco-Roman historian was almost always preceded by a
prohgue in which he informed his readers about the content of his book.
The fact that a classical author like Xenophon abstained from using a pro­
logue and abruptly opened his Hellenica with the words μετά δε ταΰτα was
probably due to the fact that this historical narrative started where the
historical work of Thucydides had ended and was apparently meant as its
direct sequel. 12 In any case, the beginning of Xenophon's work was an
exception to the rule. The absence of a prologue was usually considered as
a departure from long established standards. Therefore, Lucían could write
disapprovingly:
There are historians who "produce bodies without any heads—works lacking an intro-
duction that begin at once with the narrative." 13
Thus, the Jewish historian Josephus prefixed elaborate prologues to his Bel­
lum Judaicum and to his Antiquitates because he did not want his works to
appear, in the eyes of his educated Hellenistic audience, like headless bodies.
At the beginning or end of his prologue the Greek historian would men­
14
tion his name and his provenance. In the 6th century BC Hecataeus of
Miletos began his historical work with the words: "Hecataeus of Miletos
15
reports as follows. I write this, as it seems to be true to me." In the
5th century B.C. Herodotus, the father of Greek historiography, intro­
duced his historical narrative with the words: "This is the demonstration of
16
the investigation of Herodotus of Halicarnassus." And the opening sen­
tence of Thucydides goes: "Thucydides of Athens has described the war of
17
the Peloponnesians and Athenians." Thucydides also concluded individ­
ual books of his historical work with a remark about the exact number of
years that had passed in the war "that Thucydides has described." 18 With
this procedure, the name of the author could not escape the reader. Arrian,
in his Anabasis, has consciously deviated from this practice by not giving
his name in the prologue where he only mentioned his sources. 19 Later in
Book I he writes:
I need not write my name, for it is not at all unknown among men, nor my country
nor my family... . 20
Nevertheless, Arrian's Anabasis was not published anonymously, because it
probably had the name Άρριανός in the title. 21
Even Xenophon's Anabasis, in which the author reports about his own role as an officer
in the campaign of Cyrus, is no exception. Although it appears to the modern reader
to be anonymous, Xenophon himself elsewhere calls it the work of a certain Themis-
togenes of Syracuse. 22 Probably he published it under this pseudonym. Plutarch
identified the true reason why Xenophon did not publish his Anabasis under his own
name: Xenophon recorded "that it was Themistogenes the Syracusan who had com-
piled an account of them (i.e. Xenophon's successes), his purpose being to win greater
credence for his narrative by referring to himself in the third person, thus favouring
another with the glory of the authorship." 23
In accordance with Greco-Roman practice, the Jewish historian Josephus
revealed his name in the first paragraph of his work on the Jewish War:
"I—Josephus, son of Matthias, a Hebrew by race, a native of Jerusalem
and a priest, who at the opening of the war myself fought against the
Romans and in the sequel was perforce an onlooker—propose to provide
the subject of the Roman Empire with a narrative of the facts." 24 And nei-
ther Jason of Cyrene, author of the main source of 2 Maccabees, 25 nor
Justus of Tiberias, the rival of Josephus, 26 wrote their now lost historical
works anonymously. The same is true of the early Jewish narrators Eupol-
emus (157/158 B.C.), Artapanus, Cleodemus Malchus und Theophilus
(around 100 B.C.), who are all quoted by Eusebius in the 9th book of his
Praeparatio Evangelica (from the lost writings of Alexander Polyhistor). 27
These Jewish historians also published their works under their own names
according to the conventions of Greek and Roman historical literature.
Greco-Roman biographies were published under the names of their
authors (Euripides, Isocrates, Lucían, Philo, Plutarch, Suetonius etc.) as
well. Only the lives that belong to the genre of popular literature (1st to
4th century A.D.) were an exception: the Vita Aesopi, the Vita Alexandri
Magni (later ascribed to Callisthenes), the somewhat more sophisticated
narrative Lucius seu asinus and the Vita Secundi philosophi. These biogra-
phies have not only a rather low and episodic style but also anonymity in
common. 28
A special genre of historical writings was produced by the ancient "epit-
omisers." They extracted short summaries from extensive historical writ-
ings without changing the wording of their literary source texts. In a vital
contribution to this subject, I. Opelt has listed 42 historical epitomes. 29
Her list begins with the two-volume epitome probably extracted from
Herodotus' nine-volume history by Theopompus of Chios in the 4th cen-
tury BC. And it ends with epitomes from the Christian era. Only 7 out of
these 42 epitomes are anonymous; all the others were attributed to a cer-
tain author. An example is the excerpt of the now lost historical work
of Pompeius Trogus that was handed down under the name of Justin
(3rd century A.D.). On the basis of these observations we may conclude:
If a Hellenistic historian did not mention his name in (the prologue of) his
work, he deviated from an ancient and widespread literary convention.
In contrast to the works of Greco-Roman historiography the Old Testa-
ment historical books are anonymous without exception. 30 The author's
name is never mentioned. Even the historical source texts to which the Old
Testament narrators refer remain anonymous. 31 The historical books of the
Hebrew Bible are not named after their authors but after their introduc-
tory words ("In the beginning" etc. in the Pentateuch), after their content
(Chronicles) or after their main characters: Joshua, Judges, etc. Later nar-
rative works like Tobit, Judith or the Books of the Maccabees and other
writings like the anonymous Vitae Prophetarum 02 or Joseph and Aseneth
have also been named after their main characters. 33
In all these examples of Jewish historiography the narrator stays in the
background and remains hidden. In the Old Testament only the prophetic
books and works that belong to the genre of wisdom literature carry their
authors' names. 34 In the history of Jewish historiography the Hellenistic
historian Josephus was one of the first who did not publish his books
anonymously. In his Antiquities, for instance, in which he retells the con-
tent of the anonymous historical books of the Old Testament, he candidly
reveals his identity.
Read against the background of Ancient Near Eastern literature the
anonymity of the Old Testament history books was anything but unusual.
Acadian literature was for the most part handed down anonymously as
well. 35 In Mesopotamia, historical epics were generally published without
their authors' names. And Egyptian literature was mostly written anony-
mously as well. Near Eastern Wisdom books frequently carried their
authors' names. Writings on the deeds of the Pharaohs, however, were usu-
ally written by unknown authors. 36 Not until the time of Alexander the
Great did Greek literature and literary conventions gain a decisive influence
in the Ancient Near East, "among them the wider use of authors' names." 37
Nevertheless, even during the Hellenistic period, Jewish writings were still
being published without the names of their authors. As a rule, however,
only wisdom, apocalyptic, and testamental literature mentioned the names
of the respective authors. 38
Most of the documents found at Qumran give no indication of authorship. Works
that mention their authors' names (such as the Testament of Levi or the Psalms of
Joshua) are the exception. Qumran literature is largely anonymous. This applies not
only to the paraphrases of biblical narratives (rewritten Bible) but also to the poetical,
liturgical and wisdom texts such as the Hodayot and the Sabbath Songs. The Pesharim
(lQpHab etc.) and the halachic texts (such as the Temple Scroll, the Community
Rule, the Damascus Document and the War Scroll) are also anonymous. 39 This is
something they have in common with the works of rabbinic literature. Mishna, Tosefta
and the Talmudim as well as the Midrashim were also distributed anonymously. 40
Furthermore, the Hebrew history books did not have a prologue that
informed the readers about their purpose and their sources. They also did
not contain authorial reflections in the first person. 41 Even 1 Maccabees
still makes use of this Old Testament style. In contrast, 2 Maccabees already
includes a prologue by the author in the first person. This prologue con-
cludes with the following words (2 Mace 2:19-32):
At this point therefore let us begin our narrative, without adding any more to what has
already been said; for it would be foolish to lengthen the preface while cutting short
the history itself. 42
By writing these words the author of 2 Maccabees adopted a literary device
characteristic of Greek historiography. Yet, even 2 Maccabees remains
anonymous.
It should be remembered that 2 Maccabees is an excerpt of the five
volume historical work of Jason of Cyrene and thus represents one of the
epitomes discussed by I. Opelt. The author of 2 Maccabees does not men-
tion his name, neither in the prologue nor in the title. In this regard
2 Maccabees may be regarded as a close analogy to the Gospel of Luke whose
prologue is also anonymous. The same holds true for the Wisdom of
Ben Sira. In its prologue, which introduces the author s Greek translation
of his grandfather s originally Hebrew work, the grandson of "Jesus, son
of Sirach" (Sir 50:27) also conceals his name. 2 Maccabees, like the Old
Testament history books, was named after its main characters. Clement
of Alexandria called it "The epitome of the Maccabees." 43 And in one
of its two oldest manuscripts (V) the writing is called "epitome of the
deeds of Judas Maccabeus." Nevertheless, the designation "2 Maccabees"
prevailed. Because of the anonymity of his work the author of 2 Macca­
bees differs from the Greco-Roman epitomisers who usually published
their works under their names.
Jerome also describes 1 and 2 Chronicles as excerpts of older historical
45
works: Paralipomenon liber, id est instrumenti ueteris επιτομή. In contrast
to the author of 2 Maccabees the author of Chronicles did not write a
prologue and thus did not inform his readers in more detail about the
sources of his subject matter. Still, the two Jewish epitomisers have in com­
mon that they published their works anonymously in accordance with the
conventions of Old Testament historiography. The Old Testament historians
(and those early Jewish historians who were influenced by them) consistently
wrote their works anonymously.
By writing anonymously the New Testament narrators were closer to
Hebrew than to Greco-Roman historiography. The first and second Gos­
pel present themselves in the style of Old Testament history books: anony­
mous, without prologues, and without any first person reflections by their
authors. The Gospel of Luke and especially the Book of Acts with their
prologues and the statements of their authors in the first person conformed
to a certain extent to the conventions of Greco-Roman historiography. Yet
they, like 2 Maccabees, remain anonymous. Their authors integrated ele­
ments of both traditions. The following table can illustrate this. Brackets
indicate cases in which the simple difference between plus (+) and minus
(-) is not completely adequate.
The New Testament historical books share the feature of anonymity, which
distinguishes them from Greco-Roman historiography, with all the works of
Old Testament (and Near Eastern) historiography. In concealing their
authors' names the narrative books of the New Testament follow the model
of the Old Testament books from Genesis to 2 Kings as well as 1 and 2
Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah.
In order to understand why ancient historians added their names to their
works we need to consider how they wrote their books and what they tried
to achieve by publishing them. In a further step (in section 4), we must ask
the same questions regarding the writings of those historians who pub-
lished their works anonymously.
In an independent treatise on the topic oí How to Write History Lucian of
Samosata (in the 2nd century AD) explained the task of a Greek historian.
Other historians explained in the prologues to their works how they had
used their sources and how they wanted to present their material stylisti-
cally. Both of these issues are among the topoi that regularly occur in the
praefationes of ancient history books. 46
According to Lucian, the first step in the historical working process was
to collect the historical source material, if possible as an eyewitness or
else by consulting reliable witnesses. 47 Contemporary eyewitnesses were,
according to Polybius, subject to close scrutiny. The historian was only
allowed to give credence to those witnesses that had proved to be reliable. 48
The amount of work involved at this stage could be considerable. As a mat-
ter of course, an epitomisers like Justin, who merely extracted the books of
others, had to do considerably less research.
After collecting all his material, the historian had to produce (in a sec-
ond step) a stylistically inelegant "series of notes (υπόμνημα τι), a body of
material as yet with no beauty or continuity." According to some ancient
readers, Caesars Commentarli fell into that category. Cicero, for example,
has Brutus say that Caesar only supplied the unadorned material out of
50
which someone else could produce a proper historical work.
In a third step, the historian had to stylistically revise his rough draft:
After arranging his material in the right order, his next task, according to
Lucian, was to "give it beauty and enhance it with the charms of expres­
51
sion, figure, and rhythm." Some historians, like Josephus and Lucian,
took the Attic prose writers of the 5th and 4th century as their guide in
52
matters of style. Others, like Polybius, wrote in literary Koine. Lucian
also refers to historians who used a rather unpretentious, colloquial Greek.
He knew one author who "has compiled a bare record (υπόμνημα γυμνόν)
of the events and set it down on paper, completely prosaic and ordinary,
such as a soldier or artisan or pedlar following the army might have put
together as a diary of daily events." Therefore, according to Lucian, this
writer did not himself create a proper historical work but "his work has
cleared the ground for some future historian of taste and ability." Yet, in
spite of his artless style the narrator mentioned by Lucian did not publish
his work anonymously but used a title that also contained his name: "Cal-
limorphus, surgeon of the Sixth Lancers, History of the Parthian War." 53
Anonymity was unusual even with stylistically unpretentious works.
The following table indicates which persons involved in the production
of Greek or Roman history books provided their names. It is immediately
obvious that only secretaries and copyists worked anonymously. Their
names are mentioned only in exceptional cases. 54 Greco-Roman historians
mention their names even if the amount of work they invested in collect­
ing their material and adorning it stylistically was rather limited. 55
Only exceptionally did ancient authors profit financially from their works. 56
Some of them explicitly state the reasons why they composed and pub-
lished their books. Serious historians were primarily interested in teaching
their readers about historical truth and in showing them how they should
behave as private persons or in political offices. 57 However, this goal could
have been achieved without telling the audience the authors' names.
The fact that almost all Greek and Roman historians published their
works under their names is probably due to their distinctive longing for
fame. Every Greco-Roman author, not just the historians, wanted to receive
recognition for his literary accomplishments. 58 A book had the potential to
make its author famous. Martial rebuked a certain Faustinus, because he
found it difficult to finally publish a work he had written: "Do you hesitate
to admit Fame that stands before your doors?" 59 And Martial emphasized
that the fame of a writer should already come about during his lifetime:
"To the ashes of the dead glory comes too late." 60 Many authors, however,
were striving for literary recognition that would outlast their death. Thus,
Ovid expresses his conviction at the end of his Metamorphoses that this
work was destined to become his own everlasting monument:
I shall be borne immortal far beyond the lofty stars and I shall have an undying name.
Wherever Rome s power extends over the conquered world, I shall have mention on
mens lips, and if the prophecies of bards have any truth, through all the ages shall I
live in fame. 61
Historians, too, were hoping for fame and recognition by publishing their
historical works. In the prologue to his Antiquities Josephus mentions sev­
eral goals that, according to him, motivated historians to write their works.
In the first place he refers to fellow writers who approached their task
"eager to display their literary skill and to win the fame therefrom
expected." 62 Even epitomisers like Justin reckoned with the appreciation of
their readers for their (albeit comparatively small) literary efforts: "For
your approbation is sufficient for me for the present, with the expectation
of receiving from posterity, when the malice of detraction has died away,
an ample testimony to my diligence." 63 Only authors who published their
work under their own names could hope for fame and recognition. That is why
Greek and Roman history books were not published anonymously.
Why did Old Testament historians write their works anonymously?
An old answer suggests that Old Testament narrators abstained from using their names
because they considered the Holy Spirit to be the true author of their works. As works
inspired by God, the narrative books in the Bible had no real human author; their
writers were simply pens in the hand of God. This was the argument on the basis of
which Gregory the Great (in the prologue of his Moralia in lob) declared it unneces­
sary to determine the author of the anonymous book of Job: "If we regard the Holy
Spirit as the author and ask nonetheless who the scribe is, what else are we doing than
reading the text and enquiring about the pencil?" 64 According to this view the author
of the book of Job concealed his name because he considered God to be the actual
author of his work and viewed himself as a more or less passive mediator of God s
revelation. This traditional interpretation can easily be applied to the other historical
books of the Old Testament and to the New Testament Gospels. Yet, the value of this
explanation is limited by the fact that the prophetic books and apostolic letters of the
Bible contain their authors' names. Thus, Gregorys thesis is unable to explain why
several biblical authors (which he considered to be equally inspired) deliberately put
their names at the beginnings of their works. His approach to the problem, while
interesting, fails to explain why only some biblical books originated (and were trans­
mitted) anonymously.
Another early, yet more plausible answer arises from an important text written by
Galen of Pergamum. In the prologue of his work De libris propriis Galen explains why
others were able to present as their own works books that actually he himself had writ­
ten. „To friends and students who asked to get notes of what they had heard they (i.e.
some of Galen's books) were given without a title (χωρίς επιγραφής) since the books—
as they certainly knew—had not been made for publication but for their personal
65
use." In a similar way, John Chrysostom explained the anonymity of the five books
of Moses and the four Gospels in his commentary on Romans: The biblical narrators
did not mention the author's name, because "they were writing to people, who were
present, and it had been superfluous to show themselves when they were present. But
this man {i.e. Paul) sent his writings from afar and in the form of a letter, for which
cause also the addition of the name was necessary." 66 Yet, in the case of the Gospels, it
appears to be difficult to find enough evidence that in the early church they were
regarded as private writings for a limited circle of disciples of the evangelists. And the
library index quoted by Irenaeus explicitly speaks of the publication or general release
(έκδώσις) of the Gospels. 67
There must be other reasons for the anonymity of the biblical narratives.
These must be identified through an analysis of the work process and the
self-perception of their authors.
In the formation of Old Testament historical works not only the scribes and
secretaries remained anonymous but also the historians (and epitomisers).
Even historians who had taken great pains in order to collect and arrange
(and adorn) their material abstained from publishing their narratives under
their names. The anonymity of the Hebrew historians corresponds to the
observation that within Old Testament historiography auctorial reflections
in the first person are almost entirely missing and that the narrators present
their speech material almost completely in oratio recta.
This stands in stark contrast to Greek historiography. Herodotus used
the first person hundreds of times in order to reflect on the reliability of his
sources and his own reports. Thucydides provided information about his
historical method, his temporal relationship to the events of the war and
his narrative technique in his prologue and did so in the first person (I 20-
22). The Greco-Roman historians acted as open narrators. 68 In contrast,
the Hebrew historians from Genesis to Kings totally abstained from state-
ments in the first person in which they would reflect on the purpose and
method of their work. The Old Testament narrators consciously remained
virtually invisible. 69
A similar effect was achieved by reproducing the speeches consistently
(with only a few exceptions) in direct speech. Thus the statements of the
agents were presented much more directly and vividly. At the same time
the narrators remained entirely in the background. In contrast, Greek his-
toriography detached itself from the example of Homer, who also used to
present his figures' words in direct speech. Greco-Roman historians deliv-
ered large parts of their discourses in indirect speech. Through their narra-
tive techniques they moved themselves somewhat more into the focus of
their readers. In Greco-Roman historiography the gap between the speaker
and the narrator is more visible than in Hebrew history writing. 70
Furthermore, Hebrew historians were not interested in editing and
altering the style of their sources in order to distinguish themselves as skil-
ful writers. Their reluctance to change the wording of their source texts can
be observed most clearly in a synoptic comparison between the text of
Chronicles on the one hand and the Books of Samuel and Kings on the
other hand. On average, the Chronicler has preserved 80% of the original
wording of his presumed source texts. 71 The anonymity of Old Testament
historiography is related to the fact that it does not contain reflections in the
first person nor does it use indirect speech and that it reproduces the wording of
the respective source texts rather closely.
In order to understand the relationship of Hebrew historians to their sub-
ject matter an additional factor has to be taken into account. According to
W. Speyer the historical books of the Old Testament were to be regarded as
"records of very old oral traditions." 72 This characterization is basically
accurate. It must, however, be modified in light of the written sources to
which Hebrew historians regularly refer (1 Kings 11:41 et al). Old Testa-
ment narrators thought of themselves as mediators of oral and written
traditions. "The narrator disappears behind his material. He does not, as it
were, report on historical events; rather he passes on traditions." 73 The
writer remains invisible behind the tradition he hands on, acting as its
nameless mouthpiece. 74 In Old Testament historiography the historical
tradition had absolute priority, as indicated by the fact that these historical
works are almost invariably anonymous.
In contrast to the anonymous historical works, the prophetic and
Wisdom books of the Old Testament (and the Ancient Near East) were
published under their authors' names. The comprehension of the reason
for this difference has already been lost in late antiquity. In his commen-
tary on Romans Chrysostom wrote somewhat perplexed:
But when the prophets have mentioned their own names and also Solomon, I leave it
for you to examine this further, (that is) why some (i.e. the prophets and Solomon)
have mentioned it while others (i.e. the Old Testament historians) have not. For you
are not to learn everything from me, lest you become more dull. 75
The correct explanation which Chrysostom apparently was unable to give
should have been that the authority of Wisdom literature was generally
deduced from the authority of the Wisdom teachers. Their names were
therefore mentioned. With regard to prophetic literature, the authority of
prophetic messages depended even more on the identity of the particular
prophet who claimed to have been appointed by God and to be authorized
to act as a mediator of divine revelation. For this reason an anonymous
prophetical book was considered unacceptable in the world of the Ancient
Near East (and the Old Testament). 76 With historical works there was no
comparable concern with the identity of the writer. The attention was
focused entirely on the subject matter.
An appreciation for the essential relationship between the anonymity of
Old Testament (and Ancient Near Eastern) historiography and the priority
of its content or subject matter has rarely been expressed by Greco-Roman
historians. Yet, Salvian of Marseille had to defend himself in his ninth let-
ter against critics who accused him of having published his four books to
the church (Ad ecclesiam) under the name of Timothy. In one of his argu-
ments he tried to explain why a work could abstain from mentioning the
(true) name of the author:
In every book one searches more for the impact of what one is reading than for the
name of the author... Since the name of the author has no impact at all, it is needless
that the one who has found value in the writings should ask for the name of the
author. 77
A statement by Sulpicius Severus has still more in common with the true
reason for the anonymity of Old Testament narratives. At the beginning of
his Life of St Martin, in the dedication letter to Desiderius, Sulpicius
explains why he was willing to have his biography of bishop Martin of
Tours published anonymously:
Kindly erase the title which the book bears on its front, so that the page may be silent;
and (what is quite enough) let the book proclaim its subject-matter, while it tells noth-
ing of the author. 78
In the context of this paper, the fact that the authors offer to have his work
published anonymously belonged to the humility topoi of hagiographie
literature and thus must not be taken at its face value is irrelevant. 79 The
prologue of Sulpicius Severus explicitly put into words an authorial self-
perception that also formed the basis of a very different kind of historiog-
raphy. The anonymity of their works was the stylistic device by which Old
Testament (and Ancient Near Eastern) historians presented themselves as rather
insignificant mediators of the traditional material they passed on and by which
in contrast they gave highest priority to their subject matter.
By writing their works without mentioning their names, the New Testa-
ment narrators deliberately placed themselves in the tradition of Old Tes-
tament historiography. Like their Old Testament models, they wanted to
use the anonymity of their works to give priority to their subject matter,
the narratives about the life of Jesus (and the spread of the early Jesus
movement). As authors they wanted, for the most part, to disappear behind
their subject matter. In order to move the subject matter to the foreground
as much as possible they let their actors talk mostly in direct speech and
abstained from any reflections in the first person. Even in this respect they
took over the stylistic devices with which the Old Testament historians had
already tried to disappear as far as possible into the background of their
narratives. Since they were mainly concerned with their subject matter and
not with displaying their literary skill, the narrators of the New Testament
also largely abstained from elevating the colloquial Hellenistic prose of
their sources to a more sophisticated literary level. All of these literary
idiosyncrasies of the Gospels and Acts 80 were designed to make the authors
as invisible as possible and to highlight the priority of their subject matter.
That early readers understood this self-perception of the evangelists is
shown by the testimony of Papias concerning the Gospel of Mark. The
presbyter quoted by Papias makes unmistakably clear that in his view the
content of the second Gospel had merely been transmitted by Mark, its
assumed author. As Peter s interpreter, Mark had mainly reproduced the
content of Peters oral presentations. 81
In spite of this information, which corresponds well with the anonymity
of the second Gospel, it is clear that Papias himself is interested in the
identity of the Gospels' authors. This was probably due to his concern to
substantiate the historical claim of the Gospel narratives, and thus to
confirm their authenticity and reliability. The name "Matthew" represents
an implicit claim that the first Gospel came from a direct disciple of Jesus.
By appropriating the name "Mark" the second Gospel was attributed to a
close companion and co-worker of the apostle Peter, who had been a direct
disciple of Jesus.
In his argument with Marcion, Tertullian addresses the question of why
the early readers of the New Testament historical books were not content
to accept their anonymity, but emphatically asked about the names of their
authors. Tertullian also comments on the edition of Luke's Gospel that
Marcion used. It was particularly in this regard that he attached impor-
tance to the names of the Gospel authors and dismissed anonymous Gos-
pels: "We lay it down as our first position, that the evangelical Testament
has apostles for its authors, to whom was assigned by the Lord Himself
this office of publishing the Gospels." 82 According to Tertullian, the four
Gospels, written by the apostles and their disciples, differ in terms of the
order of their subject matter etc. but agree with regard to the main tenets
of the faith. In their common theological perspective, however, Tertullian
regards them as theologically incompatible with the teaching of Marcion:
Marcion, on the other hand, you must know, ascribes no author to his Gospel, as if it
could not be allowed him to affix a tide to that from which it was no crime (in his eyes)
to subvert the very body. And here I might now make a stand, and contend that a work
ought not to be recognised, which holds not its head erect, which exhibits no consis­
tency, which gives no promise of credibility from the fullness of its title and the just
profession of its author. 83
The decision of the authors on the one hand to abstain from mentioning their
names in order to highlight the subject matter met with the concern of early
readers to secure the authenticity of the historical narratives by identifying the
authors by name.
This twofold concern may also be reflected by the secondary Gospel super­
scriptions. A work like Philostratus' book about the Sophists had the title
Φιλοστράτου βίοι σωφιστών. The Gospels did not receive similar titles.
The first gospel was not called "Gospel of Matthew" (Μαθθαίου εύαγγέλιον
or εύαγγέλιον του Μαθθαίου), but "Gospel according to Matthew (εύαγγέλιον
κατά Μαθθαιον)," which was a comparatively unusual designation.
In these secondary titles the names of the evangelists are mentioned.
This must have satisfied the desire of those readers who for reasons of
authenticity and historicity wanted to know the identity of the Gospel
authors. At the same time, the word κατά ("according to") that could be
used instead of the genitive expressed that the evangelists were or wanted
to be nothing other than mediators of their subject matter. The Gospel of
Jesus Christ had existed long before the authors of our Gospels wrote their
works. They merely wrote it down, though in different versions. In a simi­
lar way, a reference to the (Greek) Old Testament "according to (κατά)
Symmachus" alluded to the conviction that Symmachus the Ebionite did
not produce the Old Testament or its subject matter, but had only been its
mediator through his particular (Greek) version. 84
The anonymity of the New Testament historical books should not be
regarded as peculiar to early Christian literature nor should it be inter­
preted in the context of Greco-Roman historiography. The striking fact
that the New Testament Gospels and Acts do not mention their authors'
names has its literary counterpart in the anonymity of the Old Testament
history books, whereas Old Testament anonymity itself is rooted in the
literary conventions of the Ancient Near East. Just as in the Old Testa­
ment, where the authors of books that belonged to the genre of wisdom
and prophetic literature were usually named while historical works were
written anonymously, only the New Testament letters and the Apocalypse
were published under their authors' names while the narrative literature of
the New Testament remained anonymous. The authorial intent of the
Gospels' anonymity can also be deduced from its Ancient Near Eastern and
Old Testament background. Unlike the Greek or Roman historian who,
among other things, wanted to earn praise and glory for his literary achieve­
ments from both his contemporaries and posterity, the history writer in the
Ancient Near East sought to disappear as much as possible behind the
material he presented and to become its invisible mouthpiece. By adopting
the stylistic device of anonymity from Old Testament historiography the Evange­
lists of the New Testament implied that they regarded themselves as compara­
tively insignificant mediators of a subject matter that deserved the full attention
of the readers. The anonymity of the Gospels is thus rooted in a deep convic­
tion concerning the ultimate priority of their subject matter.