Jude 5 contains several textual problems. Most problematic is certainly the
identification of the subject of this verse, "which constitutes the principal
basis for viewing Jude 5 as a crux interpretum? 1 Who "saved the people out
of the land of Egypt" and "later destroyed those who did not believe?"
Basically three different subjects of Jude 5 are extant in the manuscript
evidence (see tables below): (reading 1) "Lord" [κύριος]; (reading 2) "Jesus"
[Ίησοΰς] and (reading 3) "God" [θεός]. All readings appear with or with­
out the article. Of these readings, Ίησοΰς seems to be the most difficult,
but many have suggested that this reading is too hard, since it attributes to
Jesus an active involvement in the events of the Exodus and the dealings
with the wilderness generation. Hort even denotes it as "a blunder." 2 Metzger s
Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament states that "a majority of
the Committee was of the opinion that the reading was difficult to the point
of impossibility." 3 Thus, the reading [ό] κύριος is generally preferred not
only by NA 27 and UBS 4 but also by the vast majority of English translations
(including [N]KJV, NASB[95], NIV, TNIV, NLT, CEV, HCSB) as well as
by the editions of Tischendorf, von Soden, Hort, Weiss, and Merk. Both
Richard Bauckham and Charles Landon (in a doctoral dissertation on the
text of Jude) have substantially defended the traditional view of [ό] κύριος as
the original text. 4 The most significant defense of the strikingly difficult
reading Ίησοΰς (of which there have generally been very few) was done by
Carroll Osburn, yet in the past this reading has never been reflected in any
major textual edition or translation (with the exception of UBS 1/2 and the
editions of Lachmann and Bover). 5 This has changed, however, since now
the Editto Crìtica Maior (published in 2005) as well as the ESV and the
NET Bible have chosen to adopt the reading Ίησοΰς in Jude 5. 6 Most
recendy, Tommy Wasserman, in an extensive study on the text of Jude, has
again argued for the κύριος-reading, thus challenging the textual decision of
the editors of the Editto Critica Maior. 7 This recent development justifies a
re-examination of the evidence. The purpose of this study, therefore, is to take a
fresh look at both the external and internal evidence of this particular textual
problem in Jude 5 from the viewpoint of reasoned eclecticism.
Other readings that occur are:
Reading 4: κύριος Ίησοΰς—1735 Pq; 1 591 ρα] (both "Byzantine"); Did t n U 9
Reading 5: θεός χριστός—φ 72 [III/IV] ("other")
The following manuscripts mentioned in the charts are not listed by NA 2 7
or UBS 4 , but only by Tischendorf, von Soden, Merk or Bover:
(1) For [ό] κύριος: 630. Ps-Ath. Thphyl. Oec. (Tischendorf only); 175. 632.
1717. 1857. 1890. John Dam. (von Soden only); 181. 216. 307. 489. 1518.
1829. 1836. 1874. 1898. (Merk only); 383. 429. 913. 1765. 1852. 2147.
(von Soden, Merk); 104. 255. 326. 460. (von Soden, Merk, Bover - von
Soden has 255 as a θεός reading); 337.1738. (Merk, Bover); 927.1311. (von
Soden, Bover); Ephr (Tischendorf, Bover).
(2) For [ό] Ίησοΰς: 6. (Tischendorf only); 88. (von Soden, Merk, Bover); Did.
(Tischendorf, Bover).
(3) For [ό] θεός: 442. (Tischendorf only); 5. (Merk only); 1845. (von Soden,
Merk).
Before we take a closer look at the external evidence, two readings (i.e.,
readings 4 and 5) may be excluded right from the start: κύριος Ίησοΰς is
tn U 9
only read early on by Didymus (Did
) as well as by very few late manu­
scripts (1735 [X]; / 591 [XI]) and is most likely a conflation. The unique
72
θεός Χριστός has the support of $P , a third/fourth century papyrus. For it
to be original, however, one would have expected at least some traces of
8
this reading in other witnesses.
Certainly, the most inferior reading externally is [ό] θεός. Besides the
second corrector of C and one Alexandrian manuscript (1243), only a few
Byzantine minuscules (5 442 1845 [623 1846]) testify to this reading as
well as one Latin Father and some early versions. This reading must have
entered the Alexandrian texttype relatively early in the transmission proc­
ess (possibly through Clement of Alexandria in the early third century). 9
With regard to the other two readings, the external evidence seems to be
in favor of reading 2, [ό] Ίησοΰς. Although the manuscripts of the Alexan­
drian texttype are not genealogically solid, it should be noted that reading 2
has the significantly strongest support from the more reliable manuscripts
of the primary Alexandrian text. It is found in important and early Alex­
andrian uncials (A B) as well as in a significant number of important
minuscules (33 81 322 323 1241 1739 1881). Moreover, [ό] Ίησοΰς is
witnessed as early as the mid-third century (Origen 1739mg ). This, together
with the strong support from many early Alexandrian manuscripts sug­
gests that [ό] Ίησοΰς is the earlier reading.
Though reading 1, [ό] κύριος, finds its strongest support in the Byzan­
tine text, it is significant that it is also found in several manuscripts repre­
senting the Alexandrian texttype; among those are the early uncials Κ and
C* (also from two different streams of transmission!) as well as the later Ψ.
In addition, some early fathers (Ephraem, Theophylus) confirm the early
existence of this reading. In spite of this impressive evidence for reading 1,
[ό] Ίησοΰς has the stronger support from the early and most reliable pri­
mary Alexandrian sources. Furthermore, it may well be that the late sec­
ondary Alexandrian witnesses in favor of [ό] κύριος are marked by a
Byzantine influence.
In addition to being earlier, [ό] Ίησοΰς is also more geographically
widespread. It seems to be found in diverse locations already in the first
few centuries as it existed in Egypt/North Africa as well as western areas of
the Roman Empire (Jerome, Bede [although later]). It also influenced sev­
eral of the early versions (besides Jerome s Vulgate, also the Sahidic and
[possibly later] Ethiopie versions, et al.). This geographical diversity is yet
another strong argument for the primacy of the Ίησοΰς reading.
In light of the probable earlier date together with the support from the
majority of the most reliable witnesses (although there is no complete
genealogical solidarity within the Alexandrian texttype) and the geograph­
ical diversity of the manuscripts that favor [ό] Ίησοΰς, I conclude that
reading 2 has to be regarded as superior externally.
Because all three variants were written as nomina sacra, the tendency has
been to account for the different readings by unintentional change. For
example, the majority of the UBS Committee has explained the origin of
the Ίησοΰς reading in terms of transcriptional oversight, arguing that one
could easily imagine that a scribe would take the original Re as ÎC. 10 This
is entirely possible, since Κ and ι have a vertical stroke in common. Actu­
ally, we find in the New Testament several places where the supposedly
original κύριος is replaced by either Ίησοΰς (Luke 7:13, 10:41, 13:15,
22:61) or θεός (Acts 12:11, Rom 14:4, 1 Cor 7:17, 2 Thess 3:3, Jude 9) in
some manuscripts. However, in most—if not in all—of these places the
changes appear to be intentional, i.e., due to contextual or theological
reasons. 11 While the possibility of an intentional change does not rule out
the possibility that the different readings in Jude 5 were the result of scribal
confusion, two other observations tip the balance in favour of the former:
(a) It seems unlikely that Κ (in KC= κύριος) and -θ- (in S c = θεός) would be
easily mixed up. (b) The change made by the second corrector of C was
obviously deliberate, thus we have to reckon with the fact that there were
reasons for a scribe to be uncomfortable with the κύριος reading and inten­
tionally alter it (see below). Further, an unintentional confusion of nomina
sacra could account for any of the three readings as original (and not neces­
sarily only for the κύριος reading, as some seem to suggest). 12 Thus, while
one might conclude that it is possible that scribal accidents led to different
variants, there is sufficient reason to suspect that it was not purely a case of
accidental, transcriptional error.
Indeed, on closer examination, the variants appear to be the result of
intentional changes. The distribution of variants seem to suggest that scribes
replaced the more specific term Ίησοΰς with the less specific terms κύριος
or even θεός, because they might have conceived it as anachronistic and
theologically problematic to talk about "Jesus" saving the people out of
Egypt and destroying them in the wilderness. The presumption underlying
the Ίησοΰς reading is "that the pre-incarnate Christ, as the agent of God
in relation to creation, was active in the work of Israels redemption; and
that the name he was to bear in the days of his flesh could be appropriately
used of him in connection with this great historical type of salvation cen­
turies prior to his incarnation." 13 Since "Jesus" was perceived to be a mans
name (associated with Christ's humanity), one can easily imagine how
scribes would consider as too bold the notion of "Jesus," the man, being
pre-existent. Therefore, if the original reading had been κύριος, we would
have to assume that a certain group of scribes deliberately created a diffi­
culty by inserting the more specific Ίησοΰς. This is unlikely. Rather, it
seems more probable that scribes changed the more problematic Ίησοΰς
into κύριος, the name typically used for Christ the Lord, and thereby
avoided what they might have conceived as an improper human designa­
tion of the pre-existent Lord.
However, there is reason to suspect that this is not the sole theological
problem that could have played a role here. The evidence suggests that at
least part of the textual problem has to be seen against the backdrop of the
Christological controversies of the first few centuries as a general attempt
to avoid the idea of Jesus' pre-existence. This seems to be the most likely
explanation for the θεός reading. Θεός would clearly indicate God, the
Father, as the one active in the Old Testament and thus, delete any refer­
ence to the pre-existent Son. In this respect, one should note that for those
who denied the concept of pre-existence, changing Ίησοΰς into κύριος in
Jude 5 would only make the whole statement a bit more ambiguous, since,
in the light of v. 4 (which reads κύριον Ίησοΰν Χριστόν), the κύριος read­
ing would still give the impression that Jesus is in view. At least the scribal
correction in uncial C (from κύριος to θεός) is probably best explained by
assuming that the corrector was aware of the remaining ambiguity and
wanted to remove every Christological meaning from the statement. The
somewhat similar textual problem in 1 Cor 10:9 supports the view that
these kinds of changes could occur in light of different Christological con­
ceptions. 1 Cor 10:9 almost certainly reads "And let us not put Christ to
the test as some of them did [in the wilderness], and were destroyed by
snakes." 14 Textual variants for "Christ" in this verse are "Lord" and "God."
Since it can be shown that the "Christ" reading of this verse was used as
proof for Christological assertions in the third century, 15 one can easily
imagine a scribe's motivation to insert "Lord" or "God" in 1 Cor 10:9 (and
consequently in Jude 5 as well). 16 While this seems to be a reasonable asser­
tion, the following restrictive considerations need also to be taken into
account: if the possibility of a theological alteration in this Christological
text in Jude 5 away from the concept of pre-existence is supposed (which
would, of course, imply a change from Ίησοΰς to κύριος or θεός), it can,
at the same time, not be excluded that the Ίησοΰς reading had its origin in
the later anti-adoptionist tendency to stress the divinity of Christ. We have
to keep in mind, however, that both of these explanations regarding Jude 5
are somewhat problematic, since it is unlikely that the letter itself, still
significantly debated in terms of canonicity, would have been a focal point
of these Christological debates.
Finally, several scholars have tried to explain the transcriptional circum­
stances on different grounds. They have argued that κύριος should be pre­
ferred as the reading that best explains the others: Ίησοΰς and θεός should
both be seen as attempts to resolve the ambiguity inherent in the κύριος
17
reading. While this is possible, it seems unlikely, because even when a
copyist understood κύριος as a reference to Christ and wanted to empha­
size his pre-existence, he would have almost certainly supplied a Christo­
logical title as in 1 Cor 10:9 or at least adjusted his variant to the context
in v. 4. Even in this respect, Ίησοΰς is the harder reading and a scribe
would probably not have inserted it.
It is, therefore, reasonable to conclude that the Ίησοΰς reading, with its
presumption that Jesus acted in the early history of Israel, is more difficult,
and thus more prone to change in terms of transcriptional probability. This
variant can be conceived as difficult in at least two possible respects: [a] the
designation of the pre-incarnate Christ with the personal name "Jesus" and
[b] the general concept of pre-existence. While it is hard to imagine why a
scribe may have changed the subject of Jude 5 to Ίησοΰς, there seem to be
reasonable explanations for the rise of both other readings assuming
Ίησοΰς as the original variant. 18
At this point, a few short comments about the relation to other textual problems in Jude
5 must suffice. 19 There are good reasons for assuming that άπαξ should be read before
πάντα instead of in the δτι-clause. 20 If this is the case, it is interesting that K, C*, Ψ,
630 and 1505 contain the inferior άπαξ reading, so that we could suspect that these
manuscripts have a tendency to change the wording. [A Β 33 81 et al. have the supe­
rior άπαξ reading and Ίησοΰς.] Since the scribes generally had the tendency to add
the article, we should probably read the subject of the sentence without the article.
Turning to the intrinsic probability of the variants in Jude 5, our main task
is to evaluate the argument mentioned in the introduction that Ίησοΰς is
not only the most difficult reading but even difficult to the point of impos­
sibility. Is it really impossible for Jude to have written Ίησοΰς in v. 5? We
need to consider the following points:
(1) Jude could refer to Joshua, Son of Nun, since Ίησοΰς is the Greek
equivalent to the Hebrew name Joshua (see Acts 7:45 and Heb 4:8). How­
ever, in light of the context, it is hard to understand Ίησοΰς simply as
"Joshua," since v. 6 seems to require the same subject as v. 5. Now, although
Joshua led the people into the holy land and might have contributed to the
destruction of the unbelievers through his testimony (v. 5), the keeping of
the angels in eternal chains can certainly not be ascribed to him (v. 6). In
light of this, a typological usage of Ίησοΰς (i.e., Joshua being a type for
Christ) has been considered to be more likely (e.g., by Allen Wikgren),
since such a general typological concept can be found as early as the Epistle
of Barnabas (12:8-10) and in the writings of Justin Martyr {Dial. I'b.l-,
113.2-3 et al.). 21 In this case, Jude would have supplied an ambiguous, yet
possibly common, reference to Joshua that ultimately points to Jesus. Such
an interpretation would not only explain why Jude employed the term
Ίησοΰς as opposed to his normal usage of Ίησοΰς Χριστός (Jude 1,4, 17,
21, 25), but it would also shed light on the ambiguous character of the
κύριος variant itself, which could now be understood as an attempt to
prevent misunderstandings of the "Joshua-reading" by making explicit
that "Jesus, the Lord" is in view. However, the possibility for Jude using
this Joshua-typology remains doubtful for at least two reasons: (a) As we
said earlier, several of the actions attributed to the subject of v. 5 do not
directly apply to Joshua, (b) It seems unlikely that Jude—after directly
referring to Christ in v. 4—would take a step backwards and employ
Joshua as a way of pointing to Jesus.
Interestingly enough, Charles Landon has followed Richard Bauckham in applying
the Joshua-Jesus typology as a major argument for the primacy of the κύριος reading.
They reason that Ίησοΰς was introduced by a scribe who was influenced by "the
22
Joshua-Jesus typology which became popular in the second century." A scribe would
have been attracted to such an insertion by the reference to the Exodus, without notic­
ing "as an author would, the pitfalls it would encounter as the statement continues
23
[i.e., without looking ahead at w. 6-7] ." Though this is a possible conjecture, it seems
unlikely that a scribe mindful enough to think about such a typology would miss the
inappropriateness of his interpolation. Further, it is not probable that an orthodox
scribe who understood κύριος as a reference to Christ would downgrade the reference
to a Joshua-Jesus typology, thus representing a lower Christology.
(2) In what way then could Jude have used Ίησοΰς here? The mention of
"Jesus" in Jude 5 is not as strange and unparalleled as many have said. Car­
roll Osburn has pointed out that a common feature frequently observed in
second century literature is the involvement of Christ in Old Testament
history, such as Justin Martyr, Dial. 120.3, who specifically mentions "Jesus"
as "the one who led your fathers out of Egypt." 24 Osburn further argues
that Christ can also be credited with imprisoning the fallen angels described
in v. 6 in view of 1 Pet 3:22 and 1 Enoch 69:26-29, "where the Son of Man
sits in judgment upon these angels imprisoned in chains." 25 Additionally,
early witnesses like Origen (in 1739 mg ) and Didymus were obviously com­
fortable with the implications of the Ίησοΰς reading. Further, the general
idea of the pre-existence of Christ in the Old Testament does not seem to
be only some later tradition found in the writings of the Church Fathers,
but shows up in New Testament passages like John 8:58, Heb 11:26, and
especially (in a similar Exodus context) in 1 Cor 10:1-11. 26 However, it is
exactly in light of this passage from 1 Corinthians that Richard Bauckham
has argued that Jude did not intend any direct reference to Christ in v. 5 at
all. In his view, 1 Cor 10:4, 9 should be given a purely typological inter­
pretation, which he understands to mean that "Israel tempted and pro­
voked the Lord God, but the corresponding behavior of Paul's readers
would be a tempting and provoking of the Lord Jesus." 27 For Bauckham, a
similar understanding of Jude 5-7 is most plausible, namely that κύριος in
v. 5 (which he considers as the original reading) refers to the Lord God,
whose role as judge is a type for the Lordship now exercised by Christ. I
would argue, however, that the difficult passage in 1 Cor 10 is still best
understood as indicating the reality of Christ's presence and involvement
in Israel's history. 28 Therefore, in light of the somewhat parallel passage in
1 Cor 10:9 (a tradition certainly predating Jude) where the testing of
Christ is followed by destruction, it is entirely possible that the subject in
v. 5 is the Lord Jesus and that Jude even attributed "the destruction of
those who did not believe (v. 5b)" to him. 29 Although the usage of Ίησοΰς
might have a slightly anachronistic notion, Jude may well have conceived
it as an appropriate reference to Christ. 30 And in light of a continuous early
Christian tradition that regarded Jesus as pre-existent and operative in Old
Testament events, "there is certainly no aprìori reason why Jude could not
have written Ίησοΰς in v. 5 during the mid-first century [or in the late 60s
31
which is a more likely date for Jude]."
In fact, there is further contextual evidence in favor of a reference to
Jesus in v. 5. In the preceding context Jude exhorts his readers because of
ungodly men who had entered their community denying "our only Master
and Lord, Jesus Christ [τον μόνον δεσπότην καΐ κυριον ημών Ίησοΰν
Χριστόν]" (ν.4). This article-noun-Kocí-noun construction fits the Gran-
ville Sharp rule (since the nouns are singular, personal, and not proper
names), which means that δεσπότην and κυριον have the same referent,
Jesus Christ. 32 Since the noun δεσπότης is applied to God the Father sev­
eral times in the New Testament (see Luke 2:29; Acts 4:24; 2 Tim 2:21;
Rev 6:10), its attribution to Jesus could be interpreted as reflecting a rather
high Christology, including an emphasis of the deity and rule of Christ.
Now, in light of this exaltation language, it does seem to be entirely appro­
priate to have the same referent as subject in v. 5. The reference to "Jesus"
in Jude 5 is contextually linked to the denial of the only Master and Lord,
Jesus Christ. Therefore, it seems reasonable to read Jude 5-7 as a vibrant
portrayal of Christ as the pre-existent judge and thus as an implicit warn­
ing by which the readers are exhorted not to follow the men mentioned in
v. 4 who had already made the same mistake in rejecting the exalted Christ
as was made in the events narrated in Num l4:29-37. 33
Having established Ίησοΰς as the harder reading in terms of transcrip­
tional probability, it becomes evident that a reference to Jesus acting in the
early history of Israel is far less unreasonable than most members of the UBS
committee have asserted because (1) although the usage of the personal name
"Jesus" remains somewhat striking, the association of the pre-existent Christ
with the Exodus may not only be observed in New Testament writings, but
in second century literature as well, and (2) the portrayal of Jesus as the
exalted judge fits the context in Jude well. Moreover, the observation that the
34
author never employs Ίησοΰς alone, but always Ίησοΰς Χριστός, does not
necessarily suggest that Ίησοΰς is the inferior reading. Jude may well be
35
capable of variance, while it is more unlikely that a scribe would create a
reading that could be obviously considered as against the author's style.
Most text-critical scholars would concede that the external evidence is
clearly in favor of Ίησοΰς as the original reading. Metzger and Wikgren
state in the Textual Commentary that "critical principles seem to require the
adoption of Ίησοΰς, which admittedly is the best attested reading among
Greek and versional witnesses." 36 Most scholars would further agree that
Ίησοΰς is the most difficult reading. However, while the transcriptional
probabilities favor Ίησοΰς as the original reading, many have concluded
that this reading is simply too difficult. But in this paper I have sought to
demonstrate that even in light of intrinsic probability the Ίησοΰς reading
is indeed not too hard. Although difficulties remain, in light of v. 4 and in
light of the evidence both in the New Testament and other early Christian
writings, it seems totally reasonable. The internal evidence in no way pre­
cludes Ίησοΰς as the original variant, yet, in fact it even seems to prefer it.
This is in agreement with the external evidence in its support of Ίησοΰς as
the superior reading. I therefore conclude that the textual decision about
the subject of Jude 5 reflected in the Editto Critica Maior (as opposed to
several recent text-critical studies) is justified.
If Ίησοΰς may indeed be considered as the original reading in Jude 5,
this would clearly highlight the pre-existence of Christ. Further, Jesus' des­
ignation as the one who executes judgment comports well with Jude 4
(where Christ is described as the ruling Master), thus implicitly arguing for
his deity. Therefore, based on our text-critical considerations given above,
both verses taken together could be used as an argument for the existence
of a high Christology (including Christ's pre-existence) by the time the
Epistle of Jude was written.