The language of the Apocalypse has long been the source of much confusion
and dispute. Much discussed are the apparent grammatical infelicities or
so-called solecisms in Revelation, as well as the larger question of the pre­
cise nature of John's Greek. Most of the discussion has centered on whether
the usage of Greek reflects incompetence on the part of the author of the
Apocalypse, or whether it falls within the range of possible registers of the
Greek of the 1st century, or whether it reflects significant Semitic influence,
as a kind of Christianized, Jewish-Greek. 1 In the ensuing investigation I
want to examine only one feature of the Apocalypse s grammar—the use of
verb tenses in the visionary segments.
One intriguing phenomenon of the Apocalypses visions is the manner
in which the author employs a range of tense forms (present, imperfect,
aorist, perfect, future) to depict the processes that form the narrative
account (cf. e.g. 4:1-11; 5:1-14; 11:1-13; 13:1-18), apparently with refer­
ence to the same temporal sphere. This shifting of tenses has not gone
unnoticed. W. Bousset characterized the shifting tenses in the Apocalypse
as "das regellose Schwanken." 2 S. Thompson also observed the "sudden
and seemingly inexplicable shifts among aorist/present/future tenses of
verbs... without a corresponding shift in the time during which the action
being described actually takes place." 3 At least two prominent explanations
(not unrelated) have been postulated as a means of accounting for the
phenomenon of shifting tenses in Revelations visions. First, based on the
assumption that Greek tenses primarily grammaticalize temporal relations
(aorist, imperfect tenses = past; present tense = present; future tense =
future), some think that Johns use of tenses reflects time in relationship to
the visionary experience of the seer. G. Mussies insists that the tense usage
in John s visionary segments is temporally motivated and reveals a pattern
where the author commences with a past tense (aorist) to recount what he
saw or heard in the past, followed by a cluster of present tenses which pro­
vide "the life pictures of events and situations" and indicate "lively repre­
sentation" as he recounts or relives his visionary experience in the present
(the so-called "historical present"). 4 The present tenses, then, form a transi­
tion to future tenses which convey the prophetic character of the vision—
they predict future events. Consequently, the shifting of tenses is temporally
motivated and is a reflection of the authors need to recount his apocalyptic
visionary experience.
Second, perhaps the most common theory is that John's tense usage
reflects some level of Semitic influence. Given that Johns use of tenses does
not appear to conform to the standard conception of Greek tenses (usually
temporal, see above), several scholars have maintained that Johns "seem-
ingly inexplicable" usage of tenses in his visions could be accounted for
by assuming influence from the Biblical Hebrew tense system. Earlier,
A. Lancellotti proposed a rational for Johns ostensible confused use of
tenses in the timelessness of the underlying Hebrew tense system. 5 More
recently, S. Thompson has attempted to provide an explanation for the
"anomalous" use of the tenses in the Apocalypse by pointing to corre-
sponding shifts in the LXX reflecting the underlying Semitic verbal sys-
tem. 6 He illustrates this phenomenon by drawing attention to examples
from Theodotion and the LXX (Dan. 4:31-32, 35; 7:26; Hos. 4:10) where
the tense variations in the LXX and Theodotion are apparently based on
corresponding shifts in the underlying Hebrew text.
In light of some of the attention that the verbal system in the Apoca-
lypse has garnered, in the rest of this paper I wish to analyze the usage of
Greek verb tenses in one segment of Johns visionary portrayal, Revelation 5.
In doing so I want to apply the results of recent research into the theory of
verbal aspect, a theory that has not yet been systematically applied to the
Apocalypse, as a potential tool for sorting out the shifting verb tenses in
this discrete visionary segment. While grammarians traditionally have
understood either time and/or Aktionsart (kind of action) as the primary
feature grammaticalized in the verb tense endings, 7 there is now increasing
recognition that the Greek verbal tense system is fundamentally an aspec-
tual system. According to its major catalyst, S.E. Porter, verbal aspect is "a
synthetic, semantic category (realized in the forms of verbs) used of mean­
ingful oppositions in a network of tense systems to grammaticalize the
author's reasoned subjective choice of conception of a process." 8 Or,
"Aspects pertain... to the focus of the speaker with reference to the action
or state which the verb describes, his way of viewing the occurrence and its
make-up, without any necessary regard to the (actual or perceived) nature
of the situation itself." 9 What is significant about these definitions is the
recognition that Greek verb endings do not so much signify when the
action occurred (time), or the way the action actually occurred (Aktion­
sart), the main focus of traditional grammatical discussion, but rather how
the author chooses to represent, view, or conceive of the process (aspect). That
is, the author s perspective on a given process is the semantic feature gram-
maticalized by the verb morphological endings, irrespective of time or
Aktionsart. Porter proposes three primary aspectual categories or ways of
viewing processes: action viewed as a complete whole; action viewed as in
progress, as developing; action viewed as a state of affairs. These three
aspects are grammaticalized by the aorist, present (imperfect), and perfect
(pluperfect) tense forms respectively. 10
While much of the work done on verbal aspect in the Greek New Testa­
ment has necessarily been done at a theoretical level, what remains is to
demonstrate how verbal aspect actually functions over stretches of N T
discourse. 11 The application of aspect theory to the book of Revelation has
not yet been systematically undertaken. Given the recent attention devoted
to the Greek verbal system reconceptualized in terms of verbal aspect, the
shifting tenses in the visionary segments of the Apocalypse provide poten­
tially fertile ground for the application of aspect theory. It is the purpose of
this paper to examine only one such visionary segment of Johns work,
Revelation 5. After introducing this section with an aorist tense (είδον),
the author employs a full range of tense forms (aorist, imperfect, present,
and perfect) in both indicative and non-indicative moods throughout the
12
rest of his visionary construct. In particular, 5:7 has elicited a fair amount
of commentary, where the author shifts from the aorist (ήλθεν) to the
perfect (εΐληφεν), with grammars and commentators providing varying
(sometimes conflicting) explanations for the seeming anomalous presence
of the perfect form here. It is the contention of this analysis that verbal
aspect can sufficiently explain Johns usage of the tenses in chapter 5, and
that appeals to temporal values (Mussies) or underlying Semitic substrates
(Lancellotti, Thompson) are unnecessary, raising the need for further
application of verbal aspect to other sections of the Apocalypse.
D.E. Aune has demonstrated that the dramatic scene in Revelation 5
depicts the investiture of the Lamb (cf. Daniel 7; Ezekiel 1-2), where the
Lamb is invested with the authority to open the scroll and divulge its con­
tents (Rev. 5:7, 11-14). 13 Chapter 4 introduces key visual elements which
will play integral roles throughout the remaining visionary segments: God
who sits on the throne, the heavenly throne/temple, the four living crea­
tures, and the twenty-four elders. Though G.K. Beale correctly observes
that structurally the "scene in ch. 4 continues uninterrupted in 5:1," 1 4
chapter 5 nevertheless exhibits several novel features: the scroll, the Lamb
who was slain, and the transference of the scroll from God to the Lamb. In
depicting the processes that make up this visionary drama, the author uti­
lizes a full array of tense forms in his narration. 15
How do we account for the author s propensity to shift between the vari­
ous tenses throughout this vision? As suggested above, verbal aspect is now
being recognized as a theory with explanatory power to account for the
verbal structure of NT Greek. The tenses, or aspects, depict the author s
conception of a process, irrespective of temporal relations or Aktionsart.
Moreover, in addition to communicating the authors conception of a pro­
cess, there is increasing recognition of the role verbal aspect can play in
indicating levels of prominence in a discourse. There has been much inter­
est recently in the concept of prominence (salience, foreground, emphasis)
in discourse, a notion related to information flow, or how the status of
information changes throughout a discourse. 16 Prominence can usefully be
defined as the "semantic and grammatical elements of discourse that serv
set aside certain subjects, ideas, or motifs of the text as more or less semantically
and pragmatically significant than others? 11 In other words, rather than being
flat, discourse exhibits peaks where certain entities in the discourse are set
apart from others. 18
Discourse analysts have suggested at least three levels of prominence in
discourse. 19 Drawing ultimately on the language of Gestalt psychology,
linguists make a distinction between background (ground) and foreground
(figure) information. "The background includes events of lesser importance,
subsidiary procedures, secondary points, descriptions, elaborations, digres-
sions, and minor characters or things." 20 Foreground refers to those events
or characters which are of major importance and which stand out against
background material, signifying the information central to the authors
purpose (theme). In addition, a third category, frontground, has also been
suggested to refer to those linguistic elements that stand out unexpectedly
in the discourse, and upon which the readers are called to focus special
attention. 21
Though there is much work to be done on determining what linguistic
phenomena signal prominence in discourse, there is general agreement
that verbal aspect can have as one of its pragmatic functions the creation of
discourse prominence, 22 since prominence, like aspect, is concerned with
different levels of perspective (background, foreground, frontground) on
various elements in a given discourse. Thus, Porter conceives of the Greek
verbal system as a coordinated system consisting of a series of semantic
choices, with the aorist the least heavily marked choice and the present and
23
perfect representing more semantically significant choices. The aorist
aspect, then, as the basic narrative tense, can be used to carry the story
along and form the backbone of the narrative, or provide supporting mate­
rial for the main thematic elements (background). By contrast, the present
and imperfect aspects, which view the action as in progress, can function to
select certain actions to dwell upon, or to draw attention to thematic mate­
rial (foreground). Finally, as the more semantically marked aspect the per­
fect aspect (and pluperfect), which conceives of the action as a state of affairs,
can function to draw attention to selected events or actions in the dis­
course that stand out unexpectedly (frontground). While it cannot be con­
cluded that the aspects always function in this manner, a common
pragmatic use of aspect can be to demonstrate various levels of discourse
prominence.
As observed above, past scholarly attempts to account for the shifting verb
tenses in the Apocalypse s vision have commonly appealed to temporal
shifts or ostensible Semitic influence. However, it seems to me that the
shifting aspects in Revelations visions provide fertile ground for the appli­
cation of aspect theory in terms of how the aspects function to communi­
cate the author's perspective on the processes and how they potentially
function to structure the discourse and indicate levels of prominence. The
following analysis will give particular attention to how the author s choice
of verbal aspect serves to shape the discourse in Revelation 5. The ensuing
comments will extend to both indicative and non-indicative verbal forms.
Beginning with the background aorist aspect, the vision in Revelation 5
commences in v. 1 with the aorist ειδον which serves to introduce and
24
summarize John s vision. Its recurrence in 6:1 (είδον), then, functions to
frame a discrete visionary segment. However, είδον occurs three additional
times in this chapter (w. 2, 6, 11 [είδον καί ήκουσα]) to mark a change of
scene or focus in the visionary narrative. 25 Thus, the aorist είδον functions
to introduce the vision as a whole, as well as to introduce and summarize
new scenes, marking out the main units of the vision (5:1,2-5,6-10,11-14) , 26
Other verbs in the aorist also serve to carry the narrative along and indicate
background information. The basic dilemma in the visionary drama, that
no one is found who is worthy to open the book, is indicated by aorist
tenses (άνοιξαι, λΰσαι, ευρέθη, w. 2-4); they serve to summarize these
actions and move the story along. Aorist tenses also occur in w. 5-10 with
the introduction of the Lamb, where the Lamb's activity of overcoming
(ένίκησεν, v. 5) for the purpose of opening (άνοιξαι, v. 5) the book is sum­
marized (the frontgrounding perfect aspect is reserved for the actual
appearance of the Lamb in v. 6, see below). The Lambs initial approach
(ήλθεν) to the throne of God in v. 7 is also summarized using the back­
ground aorist aspect.
The response of the four living creatures and twenty four elders of fall­
ing down (έπεσαν), as well as the reason for their response, the Lamb tak­
ing (ελαβεν) the book, are both summarized in the background aorist
aspect in v. 8. The content of the song they sing in w. 9, 12 likewise recalls
the fact that the Lamb is worthy to receive (λαβείν, recalling the aorist
ελαβεν in v. 8) and to open (άνοιξαι) the book. I will return to a discus­
sion of the aorist forms of λαμβάνω in discussing the perfect tense in Rev­
elation 5, since it is in v. 7 that the author, in the midst of aorists, abruptly
switches to the perfect aspect. The basis (οτι) for the acclamation of the
Lamb s worthiness is indicated in a subordinate clause with three verbs in
the background aorist aspect, depicting the activities of being slain
(έσφάγης), purchasing (ήγόρασας), and making (έποίησας) the nations
priests (cf. 1:6). 27 All three verbs function as supporting the assertion of the
Lamb s worthiness, thus the suitability of the background aorist aspect.
The aorist ήκουσα then summarizes what John heard in v. 13, and two
background aorists, έπεσαν and προσεκυνησαν, summarize the physical
response of the twenty-four elders (v. 14).
Consequently, the aorist tense functions to summarize the authors
vision (ειδον), serving to introduce the vision as a whole and mark out
discrete units within it. The background aorist is also utilized, not as a
temporal indicator of past time {contra Mussies), but to summarize key
events and provide the backbone of the narrative, and to indicate support­
ive material, such as the reason for the Lambs worthiness.
In contrast to the background aorist tense, the present and imperfect
tenses occur throughout the vision to add descriptive color and highlight
or foreground certain events and features. By utilizing the aspect which
views the action in progress the author dwells on the action in more
descriptive detail. 28 The present participle καθήμενου serves to characterize
the one seated on the throne in w. 1, 7, 13, and recalls the description in
4:2, 3, 9 also using the present participle as descriptive of God, thus estab­
lishing cohesion within the discourse. Moreover, the preaching of the angel
is foregrounded when the author uses the present participle κηρύσσοντα in
v. 2 to draw attention to the strong angels speech. 29 Furthermore, the
remaining speeches and hymns spoken/sung by the elders and living crea­
tures are all prefaced by verbal forms in the present tense (λέγει in v. 5;
αδουσιν and λέγοντες in v. 9; λέγοντες in v. 12; λέγοντας in v. 13) which
serves to introduce the speeches and hymns, all an integral feature of chap­
ter 5. Thompson claims that the present participle λέγοντες/-ας in the
Apocalypse is a Semitism, representing the infinitive contruct Ί1ΏΚ*λ 30
However, as Porter has demonstrated, based on secular Greek parallels, this
participle form is at best "a well-accepted Greek idiom enhanced by the
LXX." 31 The appearance of the present here can be accounted for by verbal
aspect. The present tense which introduces these hymns functions to high­
light these songs since they play a crucial role in liturgically interpreting
the significance of the focal event of the Lamb's reception of the scroll in
v. 7 (see below): it is an investiture of the Lamb with authority. Thus, the
speech in v. 5 announces the main figure, the Lamb, while w. 9-10 and
w. 11-12 celebrate the Lambs reception of the scroll (authority) in v. 7,
the central event of the visionary narrative, a scene capped with a doxology
sung by the entire cosmos in w. 13-14.
The present tense appears twice in infinitive form, βλέπειν, paired with
the aorist infinitive άνοιξαι in w. 3 and 4. Mussies notes that the usual
pattern in Revelation is present-aorist infinitive, but observes the reverse
case (aorist-present) here in 5:3, though without offering any explanation
for the apparently divergent order. 32 G. Osborne contrasts the two actions
in terms of a single opening of the book (aorist) followed by a careful
perusal (present) of its contents. 33 Osborne's conception, however, is too
dependent on an Aktionsart model for Greek tenses (point action vs. dura­
tive action). 34 Rather, aspectually the switch to the present suggests that
the author chooses to draw more attention to the act of looking into the
contents of the scroll as the more salient activity of the pair, with the activ­
ity of opening the book in the aorist forming the background for the act of
looking into it. Three participle forms also occur in the present tense within
this stretch of discourse to foreground important descriptive visionary fea­
tures. In v. 6 the Lamb is described as possessing (έχων) seven horns, 35
while in v. 8 the twenty-four elders, prior to their act of singing, are
described as having (έχοντες) lyres and golden bowls. Further, the bowls
are depicted as being full (γεμούσας) of incense. In v. 10, as a result of
being redeemed (v. 9) and being made kings and priests, the saints reign
(βασιλεύουσιν), the primary reward for the martyrs (20:4; 22:5). Thus,
the present aspect is utilized to highlight certain processes or descriptive
features of main characters or elements in the vision.
Further, though the imperfect tense is comparatively sparse in the Apoc-
alypse, it occurs three times in this chapter. 36 First, the inability of anyone
to open çhe book is depicted in v. 3 with an imperfect tense form (έδύνατο),
while the seer s response to this in v. 4 is likewise depicted with an imper­
fect form (εκλαιον). 37 The angel then commands John not to weep in a
corresponding imperfective (present) imperative, μη κλαίε. 38 Finally, fol­
lowing the hymn sung by all creation in v. 13, the final responsory word
from the four living creatures (Αμήν) is introduced by a verb of speaking
in the imperfect tense (ελεγον). According to Porter, the imperfect tense,
as a more heavily marked form than the aorist, occurs as the foreground
narrative tense. Based on Porter s analysis, Aune concludes that the imper­
fects in w. 3-4 serve to foreground these aspects of the episode over against
the background aorists. 39 Thus, along with the presents, in depicting the
action as in progress the imperfects contrast with the aorists to select cer­
tain activities to describe and highlight. Yet as the tense which also gram-
maticalizes the semantic feature of "remoteness," the imperfects are less
marked than the presents, yet in contrast with the aorist they function to
foreground certain processes. 40 In summary, the present and imperfect
tenses, which grammaticalize aspectually imperfective action, serve to
highlight certain events (e.g. the speech of the heavenly beings) and func­
tion to add descriptive color in the visionary narrative. 41
The perfect tense form is also conspicuous throughout Johns visionary
portrayal, viewing different processes as existing states. The perfect tense,
in semantic opposition to the aorist and present (and imperfect) tenses,
serves to focus attention on certain (frontground) elements of the discourse
as more well-defined and contoured, and which stand out unexpectedly
within the visionary narrative. Yet the perfect aspect is not used indis­
criminately, but serves to structure the discourse in significant ways. Except
for its occurrence in an indicative verb in v. 7 (see below), the perfect
occurs with participles which cluster around the two most significant
features of the vision introduced in two of the discreet units of the vision
(w. 1,6): the scroll and the Lamb. In v. 1 the introduction of the βιβλίον
is achieved with two perfect participles which highlight the significant
characteristics of the scroll: γεγραμμένον, κατεσφραγισμένον. 42 The writ­
ten contents of the scroll are sealed from human consumption, causing the
subsequent dilemma in w. 3-4 and anticipating its solution (w. 5-7).
Perfect participles recur again in v. 6 to describe the second main visual
feature, the Lamb (άρνίον), as in the state of standing (έστηκός) and being
slain (έσφαγμένον), the latter description occurring again of the Lamb in
the hymnic section in v. 12 (έσφαγμένον). Moreover, the eyes of the Lamb,
which are identified as the seven spirits, are also described with a perfect
participle (απεσταλμένοι). The fact that the Lamb has already been intro­
duced in v. 5 does not contravene its treatment as a frontground element
here. The Lamb who will overcome has already been mentioned in the
elders speech in v. 5 (what John hears), with verbs in the aorist summariz-
ing his activity. However, though John is told about the Lamb in v. 5, the
Lamb s actual appearance is delayed until w. 6-7; now with the appearance
of the Lamb (what John sees) the perfect tense is utilized to frontground
the main character of the vision, the Lamb. 43 The function of the perfect
participles, then, is to frontground important features of the elements/
characters that are introduced for the first time and play the most significant
role in chapter 5: the scroll and the Lamb. Scholars have typically per-
ceived the worthiness of the Lamb to open the scroll to be the "centre de
la présente vision." 44 According to Aune, "The sealed scroll and the Lamb
constitute the narrative focus of Rev. 5." 45 This observation receives lin-
guistic corroboration from the author s use of the frontground perfect
aspect to introduce and characterize these paired features of the visionary
narrative.
The occurrence of the perfect aspect of εϊληφεν in v. 7 has been the subject
of some discussion and requires extended comment. 4 6 Thompson thinks
that it is probably the result of Semitic influence, though he gives no ratio­
nale for this. 47 Mussies, followed by a number of other commentators and
grammarians, endorses the view that εϊληφεν purportedly constitutes an
example of what grammarians commonly label an "aoristic perfect," that
is, a perfect tense in narrative whose perfective force has been significantly
diminished or neutralized. 48 In this case the perfect functions as a "simple
narrative tense to report past occurrences without attention paid to the
present consequences." 49 At least three reasons exist as to why scholars
think that this is the case: 1) the aorist and perfect tense forms were appar­
ently being confused by this time (lack of reduplication; similarity of end­
ings [cf.—καν]); 50 2) the perfect tense is utilized in tandem with the aorists
within the same contextual framework (temporal), suggesting similarity of
meaning; 3) a semantic distinction between the aorist and perfect tense is
imperceptible in idiomatic English translation. 51 Nevertheless, the follow­
ing observations mitigate the force of these arguments. First, though
εϊληφεν could be the result of a confusion of aorist and perfect forms, the
fact that John utilizes the aorist form of λαμβάνω three times in 5:8, 9, 12
(ελαβεν, λαβείν), as well as elsewhere in Revelation (3:11; 4:11; 6:4; 10:8,
9, 10; 17:12; 18:4; 20:4; 22:17), suggests that the author uses the perfect
form intentionally here, making confusion with the aorist improbable. 52
Second, the usage of the perfect alongside aorist tenses may just as easily
indicate a semantic distinction rather than similarity in meaning; the fact
that both aspects are used in identical temporal contexts does not justify
the conclusion that they are semantically identical. Finally, just because an
English translation (or any other target language) fails to distinguish the
perfect tense in translation does not justify the conclusion that the seman­
tic force of the perfect has been diminished or neutralized. 53
Several others assert that the authors use of the perfect in 5:7 is indeed
deliberate. Following H.B. Swete, S.S. Smalley, in his recent commentary
on the Greek text of Revelation, suggests that the perfect in 5:7 may indi­
cate realistic action, apparently due to an assumed rhetorical temporal
54
transfer of the presumed present results of the perfect tense. This seems
also to be the approach of A. T. Robertson who postulates that 5:7 is an
example of a "Dramatic Historical Present Perfect," which indicates "an
action completed in the past... conceived in terms of the present time for
the sake of vividness." 55 This construal of the perfect, however, is overly
dependent on temporal notions and requires postulating an otherwise
unspecified temporal shift. H. Giesen proposes that εϊληφεν indicates that
the book should be understood "als bleibende Gabe." 56 Giesens concep­
tion of the perfect as indicating "bleibende Gabe," however, is likewise
overly dependent on a temporal understanding of the perfect tense: a past
action with ongoing results in the present. Problematic for both of these
explanations is that, as suggested above, the perfect aspect grammaticalizes
the conception of the process as a state of affairs, but does not indicate
whether the state is temporally perpetuated (abiding) or not.
A more plausible assessment is to analyze the perfect εϊληφεν in light of
verbal aspect and its potential function within this discourse, especially in
relation to the other aspects. As the frontground aspect the perfect εϊληφεν
functions here to focus attention on the process of the reception of the
scroll. As most treatments of Revelation 5 almost intuitively recognize, the
center of the action seems to be the Lambs reception of the scroll (author­
ity) from the one seated on the throne. This assessment receives linguistic
justification in the authors usage of verbal aspect. At the juncture where
the crucial transition takes place, the author chooses the frontground per­
fect aspect εϊληφεν to highlight the transfer of the scroll from the hand of
God to the Lamb as the central narrative event (the approach to the throne
[ήλθεν] is the background feature to this event). 57 Once the transition
occurs, the author then switches back to the background aorist tense of the
same verb ελαβεν (v. 8) and βαλειν (w. 9, 12) to recall and summarize
what has taken place. 58 As Aune states, "the act of 'taking' or 'reception'
(εϊληφεν) of the scroll from the right hand of God (v. 7) signifies the 'recep­
tion (λαβείν) of the honors mentioned in v. 12: power, wealth, wisdom,
might, honor, glory, and praise." 59 Thus, the focal activity of the visionary
discourse is marked with the frontgrounding perfect aspect in v. 7, an
event which is subsequently celebrated liturgically in w. 9-14. This also
confirms linguistically Aunes assessment of chapter 5 as "the investiture of
the Lamb."
In summary, in contrast to the aorist and present aspects the perfect
aspect performs an important discourse function of frontgrounding new
and discrete elements within the discourse which are introduced for the
first time and which play a key role in the vision: the sealed book and the
slain lamb. The perfect aspect also serves to highlight the activity which is
central to the narrative: the transfer of the book from the hand of the one
who sits on the throne to the Lamb; indeed it is this transfer of the book
(authority) to the Lamb which sets the stage for the liturgical celebration
of this act in the remainder of the vision.
The purpose of this article has been to demonstrate that the shifting of
verbal aspects in Revelation 5, far from being "regellos," confusing, or
inexplicable, plays an integral role in structuring the visionary segment. I
have attempted to demonstrate that the author shifts aspects throughout
his visionary narrative, not to signal temporal shifts which reflect his
visionary experience (Mussies), nor because of Semitic intervention
(Thompson), but to indicate his perspective on the processes and to signal
discourse prominence. Therefore, the aorist aspect (ειδον) is utilized to
introduce and summarize the vision as a whole and to mark out discrete
units within the vision. Within each unit the aorist serves to background
various features of the vision as the basic narrative tense and to carry the
narrative along. By contrast, within each unit the present and imperfect
aspects, against the backdrop of the aorist, function to highlight particular
actions that the author wants to dwell on (looking into the scroll; reigning)
and which add descriptive color to the vision (the one seated on the throne;
the Lamb having seven eyes; the elders having gold bowls which are full of
incense) as well as to introduce the liturgical speeches of the various heav­
enly creatures which effectively serve to interpret the significance of the
Lamb's reception of the scroll. The perfect aspect, then, is reserved for ele­
ments of the vision that stand out unexpectedly—the book which is writ­
ten on and sealed; the Lamb who stands and was slain and whose eyes are
the seven spirits sent out into the earth. The perfect aspect is also reserved
to highlight the most significant and pivotal activity in the vision—the
transfer (εϊληφεν) of the scroll (authority) from the hand of God to the
Lamb (v. 7) which is celebrated liturgically in w. 9-12.
Two important conclusions can briefly be drawn more broadly from the
preceding analysis of verbal aspect in Revelation 5. First, at least for Reve­
lation 5, verbal aspect functions in a similar way as elsewhere in the NT. 6 0
According to Mussies (see above), the shifting tenses should be construed
temporally, as a reflection of the apocalyptic genre and the seer's experi­
61
ence. However, first, the pattern of tenses in Revelation 5 does not easily
conform to the pattern discerned by Mussies, where the aorist tense com­
mences the vision, followed by presents, and then concluding with future
tense forms. As seen above, the various tenses appear distributed through-
out the entirety of the vision. Second, due the manner in which the author
shifts tenses throughout the vision, it is highly doubtful that the readers are
meant to so rapidly shift temporal spheres of reference. 62 In this visionary
segment of the Apocalypse, rather than indicating time or Aktionsart, ver-
bal aspect functions to depict the author's perspective on the action and to
signal prominence in the discourse. 63 More work remains to be done on
other visionary segments in Revelation which shift aspects to demonstrate
how aspect serves to indicate the author's conception of processes, and to
show how aspect structures discourse. But at least for Revelation 5, the
Greek verb tenses of this visionary segment comport well with the seman-
tics of the Greek verbal system in terms of verbal aspect.
Second, the results of this study also make a modest contribution to the
debate regarding the nature of Revelation's Greek. The conclusions from
the preceding analysis suggest that at least for Revelation 5 it is unneces-
sary to postulate an underlying Semitic substructure to account for John's
tense shifts (e.g. Charles, Lancellotti, Thompson). When the Greek tenses
in John's visionary depictions are no longer evaluated from a temporal
perspective, but are rather construed as indicating verbal aspect, it is no
longer necessary to appeal to Semitic intervention to account for the osten-
sible "irregularities" in tense usage. Thompson regards the shifting tenses
in Revelation as "inexplicable from a Greek viewpoint," 64 by which he
must mean a strictly "temporal" viewpoint. But as argued above, John's
usage of verbal aspect in chapter 5 coheres with what is found elsewhere in
the N T in depicting the author's perspective on a process and at times
establishing prominence within the discourse. And particularly in narra-
tive, such tense shifts are not uncommon elsewhere in the NT. 65 Though
further analysis is required on other visionary segments, given the above
analysis, this would appear to substantiate Porter's claim that the utiliza-
tion of the verbal system in the Apocalypse falls well "within the range of
possible registers of Greek usage of the 1st century." 66 Thus, for Revelation
5 the burden of proof lies with those who would postulate Semitic influence
in John's shifting of verb tenses. 67 I have tried to show that verbal aspect
plays a more important role in structuring the visionary segment as a
whole.