Recently, the debate of the synoptic problem has gained momentum again
when Mark Goodacre argued his "Case Against Q". 1 His sharp and delib-
erate renewal of the so-called Farrer-Goulder hypothesis proposes a model
of the literary relations among the first three gospels which maintains the
literary priority of Mark, but dispenses with "Q", thus resulting in a
"Benutzungshypothese" with Matthew using and enlarging Mark, and Luke
re-editing Matthew. 2
The first principle of this model, the Markan priority, is directed against
the "Neo-Griesbach" or "Two-Gospel" theory (2GT) and its assumption
of Markan posteriority, as it was proposed by the late William R. Farmer
for many years now and is still held by a number of scholars under his
inspiration. 3 Without going into detail, the arguments for Markan priority
as collected and summarized by Goodacre are convincing. At least, they
have certainly convinced the majority of scholars in this field. 4 Even though
arguments should not be counted, but measured, it seems justifiable at this
point to go along with this cornerstone: I consider the Markan priority to
be well substantiated and, therefore, will not call it into question. Goodacre s
second principle, Lukes dependence on Matthew, is more complicated.
Since the Two-Document hypothesis (2DH) is based on the categorical
independence of Luke and Matthew, this principle lies at the heart of Goo-
dacre s "Case against Q". Consequently, he devotes the major part of his
argumentation to this problem and tries to refute the counter-arguments
that have been raised by the proponents of the 2DH against former
attempts to link Luke directly to Matthew. It is this part of Goodacre s
"Case" that proved to be controversial and met with criticism. 5 Since this
debate focuses on the most important issues of the synoptic problem and
the solution it found in the widely accepted, yet vehemently challenged
2DH, I simply summarize the most important arguments as the means of
an introduction into the problem.
There are, basically, two positive arguments supporting Goodacres
"Markan priority without Q" hypothesis (MwQH) and its assumption of
Lukes direct dependence on Matthew: the minor agreements and the
hypothetical character of "Q". 6 Although it is not a new insight that both
observations raise serious objections to the 2DH, the weak responses to
these arguments prove that it is necessary to bring them into discussion
from time to time. As for the minor agreements, Goodacre has a strong
point insisting on the principal independence of Matthew and Luke
according to the 2DH. 7 This excludes the evasive solution that, although
basically independent from one another, Luke knew and used Matthew in
certain instances. 8 Methodologically, it is not permissible to develop a the-
ory on a certain assumption and then abandon this very assumption in
order to get rid of some left over problems the theory could not sufficiently
explain. The methodological inconsistency of this solution would be less
severe, if "Q" existed. But since "Q" owes its existence completely to the
conclusions drawn from a hypothetical model, such an argument flies in
the face of logic: it annuls its own basis. This is the reason why Goodacres
reference to the hypothetical character of "Q" carries a lot of weight. 9 More
weight, certainly, than Kloppenborg would concede: he tries to insinuate
that Mark is as hypothetical as "Q", since Mark "is not an extant document,
but a text that is reconstructed from much later manuscripts." 10 This exag-
geration disguises the critical point: the hypothetical character of the "doc-
ument Q" would certainly not pose a problem, if "Q" was based on existing
manuscript evidence the way Mark is. It is, therefore, important to see that
these two objections are closely related to each other: They prove that the
minor agreements are, in fact, "fatal to the Q hypothesis". 11
On the other hand, there are serious objections against Lukes assumed
dependence on Matthew. Predictably, the criticism of the MwQH concen-
trates on three observations: (1) Luke betrays no knowledge of either the
special Matthean material ("M") or of the Matthean additions to the triple
tradition, e.g. Pilâtes wife and her dream (Matt. 27:19) or Peters confes-
sion and beatitude (Matt. 16:16-19). (2) Then there is the problem of
alternating priority: Although in some instances Luke s version of double
tradition material seems to presuppose Matthew, there are a number of
striking counter-examples, among which Lukes wording of the Lord's
prayer or the first beatitude rank highest. (3) In some cases, the arrange-
ment of double tradition material does not make any sense at all if Luke
made use of Matthew as it becomes particularly apparent with the material
of the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5-7) and its Lukan counterparts.
Although these observations carry different weight, their cumulative force
renders Luke s simple dependence on Matthew highly improbable. In light
of the double tradition material, one is inclined to suggest a Matthean
dependence on Luke rather than the other way round. 12
This outcome is not satisfactory and seems to bring the recent discus-
sion to a sudden stop. Both sides present their strongest arguments in their
critique of their respective counterparts but are much less compelling in
the solutions they offer. Whereas Goodacres criticism of the 2DH is con-
vincing, his attempt to understand Luke in direct dependence on Matthew
is not: The observation that in some cases Luke seems to be earlier and in
other instances Matthew seems to be earlier, cannot be explained with the
help of a simple "Benutzungshypothese" (the proposal of MwQH) but nec-
essarily requires an additional source. Thus the Janus-faced character of the
double tradition is one of the strongest arguments for the 2DH: The
assumption of "Q" seemed to solve this problem of mutual influence in
the double tradition. For want of an alternative text that could explain this
problem of mutual influence in the double tradition, many scholars seem
to put up with "Q" in spite of the apparent weaknesses of the 2DH.
There is, however, an additional, yet long neglected text which indubi­
tably belongs in the maze of the synoptic tradition and which, contrary to
the hypothetically reconstructed document "Q", is well attested by ancient
sources: the gospel of Marcion, or, more precisely, the gospel which was
used by Marcion and the Marcionites (hereafter: Men). Although no copy
of Men has survived, the ancient accounts 13 of this gospel produce a
sufficiently clear picture of its contents, its narrative shape and, in a num­
ber of passages, even its wording.
The reason why this gospel was not considered to be part of the synoptic
problem is obvious: from the ancient witnesses up to Harnacks seminal
and influential book on Marcion the basic judgment is taken for granted
that Men is "nothing else than an abridged and altered version of the
canonical Luke." 14 According to this view, Marcion flawed Luke for theo­
logical reasons, cutting out and altering the passages contradicting his own
theological convictions. As long as Men was regarded to be a revised edi­
tion of Luke, there was no reason to include it in the discussion of the
synoptic problem. European scholarship agreed on Mens posteriority to
Luke after a few years of fierce debate, the final stage of which is often
considered to be Georg Volckmar s book on Marcion. 15 This debate came
to a stop rather than to a solution by the mid-1850 s, scarcely a decade
after the Two-Source hypothesis was first developed. When the discussion
of the Two-Source hypothesis started out in the second half of the century,
the idea of Men being a revised edition of Luke was long agreed upon and
remaining doubts were not strong enough to open further discussions.
The outcome of this debate does not reflect, however, that there was a
considerable number of scholars in the late 18th and early 19th centuries
who proposed the opposite view and claimed that Men be prior to Luke,
Luke thus being an enlarged re-edition of Men. Among them were exeget-
ical heavyweights such as Johann Salomo Semler, Johann Georg Eichhorn,
and Albrecht Ritschi. 16 More important than their names is the fact that
their critique of the traditional view has never really been disproved: many
cogent reasons for Mens priority to Luke are still valid, which means that
in many ways it is much easier to regard Luke as an enlarged edition of
Men than the other way round. This view was convincingly, yet without
any consequences, repeated in the 20th century by John Knox. 17
Subject to the condition that Men was prior to Luke and thus ought to
be included in the discussion of the synoptic relations, the whole picture
changes considerably. It is the contention of this paper to explore some of
the consequences of this perspective for the synoptic problem. Since I have
presented the case of Mens priority in more detail elsewhere, 18 1 can confine
myself to a few basic remarks.
1. The main argument against the traditional view of Lukes priority to
Men relies on the lack of consequence of his redaction: Marcion presum-
ably had theological reasons for the alterations in "his" gospel which
implies that he pursued an editorial concept. 19 This, however, cannot be
detected. On the contrary, all the major ancient sources give an account of
Marcions text, because they specifically intend to refute him on the ground
of his own gospel?^ Therefore, Tertullian concludes his treatment of Men: "I
am sorry for you, Marcion: your labour has been in vain. Even in your
gospel Christ Jesus is mine" (4.43.9).
Tertullian was fully aware of the implied inconsequence that Mens text
did not display the editorial concept he regarded to be responsible for
Marcions assumed alterations. He took it, however, as the means of a
deliberate camouflage and explained: Marcion did not alter Luke conse-
quently but retained some passages contradicting his own views, so he
could later claim that he had made no changes at all (Tert. 4.43.7). Clearly,
this troublesome explanation does not explain anything. Tertullian hardly
believed his own argument, but then, his lack of cogency might be due to
the fierce conflict with the Marcionites in which he was engaged.
The problem, however, remained and did not escape the critics in the
late 18th and early 19th centuries who, after all, were not tied up in an
anti-heretical battle. Instead, they were methodologically conscious enough
not to force Marcions text into a pattern they could not really detect. The
incoherency between the assumed concept and the data led to the observa-
tion that, if Marcion altered Luke for theological reasons, he must have
done so very poorly. 21
2. According to Tertullian, Marcion claimed that "his" gospel was
original, whereas the canonical Luke was a falsification. The charges of
adulteration are, therefore, mutual (Tert. 4.4.1). Since the very close liter-
ary relation between both texts is beyond any doubt, the only remaining
question is: Who edited whom? In this respect, Tertullians report of
Marcions charge against the catholic Christians is very telling: Marcion
accused the gospel of Luke "of having been falsified by the upholders of
Judaism with a view to its being combined in one body with the law and
the prophets." 22 This phrase does not reflect Marcions assumed cleansing
and restoration of the original "Pauline" gospel but the editorial integra-
tion of "his gospel" into the body of the canonical bible of the Old
and New Testaments. Reciprocally, Tertullian firmly believed that Marcion
re-edited his gospel from the canonical edition, not from a pre-canonical
gospel. 23 This proposition is never addressed by those who otherwise
follow Tertullian in his charge against Marcion. This inconsistency indi-
cates that Marcions assessment as it is reported by Tertullian might be
correct: Catholic Christians revised Men and integrated it into the canon-
ical Bible.
3. The gravest objection against Marcions assumed redaction of Luke is
the fact that Men obviously did not contain any additional, non-Lukan
texts: According to the traditional view, Marcions assumed editorial altera-
tions would only have consisted of abridgments but not of enlargements,
not to speak of any substantial additions. 24 With respect to what we know
about editing older texts within the New Testament and its literary envi-
ronment this procedure would be unique. 25 There is not a single example
of a contemporary re-edition of an older text that did not support its edito­
rial concept by including additional material. The supporters of the tradi­
tional view have duly and with great surprise noted the uniqueness of
Marcions assumed redaction but did not take this hint seriously enough to
rethink their presuppositions. 26
4. Beyond a simple comparison of both texts, the problems of Men
being a redaction of Luke extend to the relation of Luke to other New
Testament texts, because the assumption of Lukan priority must postulate
that Marcion did not only know Luke, but also the other canonical gospels
and Acts. 27 In particular the relation of Luke-Acts poses a problem. There
are, basically, only two solutions: It must be assumed that Marcion found
Luke in its canonical combination with Acts, and then dissolved this unity
by deleting the Lukan prologue and rejecting Acts. 28 This would presup­
pose that the canonical New Testament (or at least substantial parts of it)
preceded the Marcionite "bible", which seems improbable in the light of
Harnacks and Campenhausens ideas about the emergence of the New
Testament canon. Therefore, Harnack preferred the solution that Marcion
did know Luke-Acts as a two-volume book, but not as part of the New
Testament, and chose to use only the gospel. This, however, is improbable
for a number of reasons, since Luke and Acts appear in all manuscripts
in different sections (gospels; praxapostolos) which are, in all probability,
a result of the canonical edition. 29 Their unity is provided only by the
prologues which do not contain the author s name, although this would be
a nearly necessary genre requirement, at least for the first volume, in par-
ticular with respect to the pronounced historiographical "I" of Luke l:l-4. 30
For readers of an isolated two-volume work "Luke-Acts", the identity of
the author would remain a mystery. For readers of the canonical edition,
however, the author s name is contained in the superscription of Luke
("Gospel According to Luke") and can without any problems be trans-
ferred to Acts—but only if the prologues provide the necessary clues link-
ing both volumes together. This dilemma cannot be solved on the
assumption of Lukan priority. The opposite view of Men s priority, how-
ever, provides an easy solution: in this case, Marcions charge was correct
that a catholic interpolation incorporated "his" gospel into the canonical
bible of the Old and New Testaments, made some editorial additions and
feigned Luke-Acts as a literary unity.
5. Beside these general observations the most convincing argument for
Mens priority to Luke is, of course, the demonstration of the editorial
process of Lukan redaction. In many individual instances the differences
between Men and Luke are best understood as editorial additions in Luke
rather than reductions by Men. The most obvious case is Luke's re-editing
of the beginning of Men (*3:la) with its substantial additions and the
editorial change of the sequence of *4:31-37 and *4:16-30. 31 Mens prior-
ity to Luke is even more convincing when the overall picture of Luke s
editorial changes comes into view because most of his editorial changes
add up to an integral and consistent concept. 32 The editorial concept that
could not be detected in Marcions assumed editorial changes is apparent
in Luke, thus confirming the view of Men being prior to Luke.
As a result of reversing the literary relations between Luke and Men, it
is apparent that the historical Marcion did not create "his" gospel but sim-
ply shared an older, already existing gospel. It is labelled "Men" here
because this particular "Proto-Luke" is well attested to be utilized later by
Marcion and the Marcionites.
These rather general remarks should be sufficient to include Men among
the usual suspects responsible for the literary relations between the synop-
tic gospels. In order to test the case I have selected a number of examples
from the recent discussion of Goodacre's "Case against Q". They seem to
be apt because they very clearly focus on the controversial relation between
Matthew and Luke. For this procedure one restriction must be kept in
mind: Mens text is not completely recoverable. The main witnesses, Ter-
tullian and Epiphanius, provide allusions to Men rather than direct quota-
tions, their accounts are not exhaustive and tend to be less careful towards
the end, and sometimes they even contradict each other. But the general
picture is clear enough: in a good number of cases they explicitly claim
certain passages (of Luke) to be present or absent in Men, although for a
few passages no judgment is possible. 33
1. I begin with the rather unspectacular Matthean additions to the Triple
Tradition not to be found in Luke. On the assumption of Goodacre s
MwQH, these texts call for an explanation, because if Luke is directly
dependent on Matthew, it is hard to understand that he followed Mark but
not Matthew, e.g. in Matt. 3:15 (Johns objection to Jesus); Matt. 12:5-7
(Jesus' answer to the Pharisees); Matt. 13:14-17 (the full quotation Isa.
6:9-10); Matt. 14:28-31 (Peter walking on the water); Matt. 16:16-19
(Peters confession and beatitude); Matt. 19:19b (love command in Jesus'
answer to the rich young man); Matt. 27:19, 24 (dream of Pilate's wife,
Pilate washing his hands). 34 These examples are instructive considering the
complex and guarded argumentation of synoptic matters in particular.
Goodacre states correctly that these additions pose a problem only for the
2DH but not for MwQH, since Luke did receive, in fact, an abundance of
material from Matthew, e.g. the Mark-Q overlaps, the double tradition,
and the minor agreements. Thus, when Luke followed Mark rather than
Matthew in a few instances, this does not prove Luke's dependence on
Matthew wrong. 35 The reply in support of 2DH is insofar weak as it
must rely on internal reasons only: Kloppenborg argues that some of these
additions would well fit into Luke s editorial concept, so it is not plausible
36
why Luke should not have taken them over.
Methodologically, this dispute suffers from its negative preconditions.
Whereas Goodacre states that these cases do not really harm the MwQH,
Kloppenborg replies that it is not understandable that Luke did not include
them in his gospel. It is, of course, the absence of "Q" that requires this
e silentio argumentation on a rather hypothetical level, here indicated by
double negations. The inclusion of Men, however, allows for a positive and
convincing argument: Luke does not have the Matthean additions to
Mark, because his main source was neither Mark nor Matthew, but Men.
All but one of these examples are reported to be part of Men, which allows
for a positive check:
(1) If Luke had read Matthew, an equivalent of Matt. 12:5-7 was to be expected
between Luke 6:4 and 6:5. However, Tertullian (4.12) attests the whole pericope of
the plucking of corn for Men and even alludes to parts of *6:4 (4.12.5) and *6:6-7
(4.12.9-10). Epiphanius, too, clearly read *6:3-4 in Men. 37 Lukes lack of an equiva­
lent of Matt. 12:5-7 is, therefore, easily understandable if he followed Men, not Mat­
thew. (2) Jesus' teaching about the function of parables is not reported for Men. But
since the complete context of this teaching is warranted for in Men, it is a safe assump­
tion that Men did contain it in its "Lukan" form (Luke 8:9-10). 38 (3) The Lukan
parallel for the next example, Matt. 14:28-31, would be part of the passage that, in the
terminology of the 2DH, is known as the "great omission", i.e. the text of Mark 6:45-
8:26 which has no counterpart in Luke and would be expected to appear between
Luke 9:17 and 9:18. As expected, Tertullian confirms that Men had both verses in
immediate succession (Tert. 4.21.4, 6): In this case, Luke followed neither Mark nor
Matt, but Men; therefore, he could not possibly have Matt. 14:28-31. 39 (4) The same
phenomenon must be assumed for Peters confession and beatitude (Matt. 16:16-19)
which would have its place between Luke 9:20 and 9:21. Again, Tertullian read both
verses successively (4.21.6). Although Peters confession is attested differendy by Ter­
tullian (4.21.6: tu es Christus) and by Adamantius {Dial. 2.13: τον Χριστόν), these
short forms are much closer to Luke 9:20 (τον Χριστόν του θεοΰ) than to Matt.
16:16 (ει ό Χριστός ό νιος του θεοΰ του ζώντος). (5) The restrictive clause of fornica­
tion in Jesus' teaching about adultery and re-marriage (Matt. 19:9b: μη επί πορνεία)
is absent not only in Luke (16:18) but also in Men: the whole chapter is attested by
Tertullian who gives special attention to *16:16-18 (4.33.7, 9; 4.34.1). Tertullian
states in particular that Marcion did not hand down "the other gospel and its truth"
(4.34.2) because Tertullian needs the clause of fornication for his argument, but does
not find it in Men: in spite of his own intentions, he must resort to Matthew in this
case in order to refute Marcion. 40 (6) The pericope of the rich young ruler is one of the
best attested texts in Men (* 18:18-23): Jesus' explicit statement about "God the father"
(*18:19) was so important for the catholic Christians' refuting Marcion from his own
gospel that all major sources attest this text for Men. Specifically, Adamantius {Dial.
2.17) quotes Jesus' answer to the young ruler extensively: like Luke 18:20, Men con-
tained only the selection of Decalogue commandments but not the additional love
commandment as Matt. 19:19 has it. (7) Of Jesus' trial before Pilate only the begin-
ning is attested by our witnesses, 41 so there is no information about whether Men did
contain any mention of Pilate's wife and her dream (Matt. 27:19) or of Pilate declaring
Jesus innocent and washing his hands (Matt. 27:24).
The Matthean additions to the triple tradition do not create a problem if
Luke followed Men instead of Matthew. Furthermore, there is no need to
suggest "Q" as an explanation for these texts. It is only in the first example
(Jesus' answer to the Baptist in Matt. 3:15) that Luke did not follow Men
but Matthew: since Men began with *3:la and continued with *4:31-37,
16-30, Luke could not find in it a report of Jesus' baptism at all. 42 Instead,
at this point, he followed Matthew, however with his own apparent edito-
rial emphasis: it is not at all surprising that Luke did not take over the
particular Matthean interpretation of Jesus' baptism as "fulfilling all righ-
teousness".
2. This last example, Luke's lack of the addition in Matt. 3:15, leads to
the next category, the "M"-material not present in Luke, i.e. the texts special
to Matthew outside the triple tradition ("Sondergut"). That Luke does not
have this "M" material is, of course, not a valid argument against his
dependence on Matthew, as Goodacre correctly observes. 43 The argument
is circular and formulated from the point of view of the 2DH: it is absent
in Luke by definition. On the assumption of the MwQH, however, there
remains a fair amount of material added by Matthew to the triple tradi-
tion, which Luke did not include. Although some arguments can be raised
in order to demonstrate that Luke showed knowledge of the Matthean
birth stories, the material outside the birth (and resurrection) stories still
calls for an explanation. But, again, Goodacres explanation why Luke did
not take over this material, is as hypothetical as Kloppenborgs reply why Luke
45
would have liked it, provided he had read Matthew. Both argue e silentio
from Luke s omissions and try to explain something which is not there.
For most of this material the answer might be much simpler: if Luke
46
followed Men, he did not find any of the "M" material, which is, there­
fore, exactly what it is called in the terminology of the 2DH: material
special to Matthew. Since Luke did not "omit" it from his source, there is
no need for a hypothetical explanation of his reasons for doing it this way:
he simply followed the narrative frame of Men.
On the other hand, it is clear that Luke did use Matthew. This is in
particular true for the birth stories where the close parallels between Mat­
47
thew and Luke have long been registered. Interestingly, they do not only
relate to matters of contents such as the virginal conception, the place of
birth, the names of Jesus' parents etc. and to literal agreements in the text. 48
It is also possible to determine the direction of the influence between both
texts. The whole logic of the narrative of Jesus being born in Bethlehem
makes sense only for Matthew: he knew from Mark 1:9, 24 etc. that Jesus
came from Nazareth but nevertheless was interested in depicting him as a
descendant of David and did so by locating his birth in "Bethlehem of
Judea" (Matt. 2:1, 5-6) whose christological importance is underlined by
the formula quotation. Since Jesus' Davidic lineage is much more impor­
tant for Matthew than for Mark or Luke 49 it is understandable that he
wanted Jesus to be born in Bethlehem. Matthew solved the conflict with
the Markan notice of Jesus' being from Nazareth by the whole narrative
setting in ch. 2: Herod s persecuting the newborn "king of the Judeans"
(2:2) is inseparably intertwined with the topic of Jesus' Davidic lineage
and the flight to Egypt (again emphasized by a formula quotation, 2:15),
as the implied irony makes clear: the illegitimate (non-Davidic) king
chases away the legitimate "Son of David", thus adding to his legitimacy
(2:15). The remark about Archelaus (2:22) forms a segue to Jesus' well-
known origin from Nazareth. It is, therefore, evident that the Matthean
"Bethlehem" is a necessary element in a well-crafted context. Although
Luke took over Bethlehem as Jesus' birthplace, it does not play a leading
role in his narrative logic. Luke is not interested in the thematic complex
he found in Matthew but rather stresses the universal and historical
circumstances for Jesus' birth (Luke 2:1-2) which displays the same edito-
rial concept as the addition of the sixfold synchronism to *3: la. As a result,
the Matthean birth stories are not purely "M" material: since they indicate
a Matthean influence on Luke, they rather prove to be sort of "double
tradition."
3. It is the double tradition that really complicates Luke's assumed
dependence on Matthew as proposed by the MwQH, because in some
instances this material seems to have a more primitive form in Luke than
in Matthew. Actually, the problem of alternatingprimitivity in double tra-
dition material was originally one of the main reasons for the development
of the 2DH: since a bi-directional influence from Matthew to Luke and
from Luke to Matthew is impossible, the assumption of a common source
used by both Matthew and Luke independently of each other seemed to be
the best solution, because it provided the possibility that either of them
stuck to the original wording in some places and changed it in others.
Therefore, Goodacre and his critics gave special attention to this issue. 50
On the assumption of Men being prior to Luke the observation of alter-
nating primitivity finds a completely different and rather simple solution.
The following investigation concentrates on the major examples where
Luke seems to have a more primitive text than Matthew:
(1) The prime example is the text of the first beatitude of the poor, for it seems improb­
able that Luke rendered the Matthean οι πτωχοί τφ πνεύματι (5:3) in οι πτωχοί
(Luke 6:20b). However, Luke did not render Matthews text at all but simply used
51
Men, as Tertullian attests. (2) Similarly, the last Matthean beatitude mentions revile-
ment, persecution, and the utterance of all kinds of evil "on my account" (5:11). This
sounds like an unspecific generalization, if compared to the Lukan version which
specifies: hatred, revilement, defamation, and exclusion which the addressees experi­
ence "on behalf of the Son of Man" (6:22). Again, an influence from the Lukan ver­
sion to the Matthean is as unlikely as unnecessary: Tertullian attests the Lukan version
52
for Men already. (3) The same is true for the Lords prayer where the Matthean ver­
sion (6:9-13) is longer than Lukes version with only five requests (11:2-4). Further­
more, the address also shows a particular Matthean addition (πάτερ ημών) ό εν τοις
ούρανοις. Thus the judgment seems inevitable that Matthew enlarged and re-edited
the Lukan version. But again, this version is already attested for Men, which then
53
would have contained the presumably oldest text of the Lords prayer. In his discus­
sion of the Lord's prayer, Tertullian does not provide exact quotations from his copy
of Men but rather mere allusions to the text. Nevertheless, it is sufficiently clear that
there is no trace of the second and seventh Matthean requests (on the fulfillment of
Gods will and on the deliverance from evil). As a side-effect, this reconstruction of the
history of tradition provides the solution for the old textual problem of Luke 11:2,
where Men's first request did not ask for the kingdom to come but for the spirit. 54 The
invocation of the spirit, which is attested for the early church and in some medieval
manuscripts, most probably represents the Lukan version, which later was corrected
according to the Matthean version. 55 Since a textual influence from Men on some
medieval manuscripts is only imaginable if it was mediated through bible manuscripts,
this textual problem further corroborates the priority of Men. (4) According to Matt.
12:28 the expulsion of the demons is the work of the spirit, whereas Luke (11:20)
ascribes it to the "finger of God". Fortunately, Tertullian provides enough text to prove
that Men had the "finger of God" as well. 56
With respect to the problem of alternating primitivity, the result is clear:
in these instances, Luke does have a more primitive text than Matthew.
This does, however, not corroborate the assumption of "Q" but the prior-
ity of Men, on which Luke is dependent. This means, on the other hand,
that the differences between Luke and Matthew are due to Matthean addi-
tions to Men. Now the "alternating primitivity", or rather, the unsolvable
problem of bi-directional influence from Luke to Matthew ¿Wfrom Mat-
thew to Luke becomes apparent: whereas it is clear that Luke drew on
Matthew, it is only in pretence that Matthew relied on Luke: instead, Mat-
thew used Men. But since Men was completely contained in Luke and very
similar to him, the impression of a bi-directional influence is not com-
pletely wrong.
4. This assumption has to stand the prime test, i.e. the problem oí Luke's
presumed re-ordering of Matthean material. The most prominent example
for this phenomenon is the Sermon on the Mount: it is, indeed, hard to
believe that Luke dissolved the order of the material of Matt. 5-7 and scat-
tered it over more than a dozen different places within Luke 11-16. Although
Goodacre s observation is correct that three chapters of un-interrupted
speech is a nightmare for somebody who wants to tell a story, his solution
that Luke broke up Matthews narrative order for dramatic reasons is not
convincing: he assumes that Luke, knowing Mark better and for a longer
time than Matthew, used the Markan narrative as the backbone in which
he inserted some of the material from the Sermon on the Mount. 57 This
auxiliary argument undermines his main approach of Luke being depen-
dent on Matthew. The dispersion of the Lukan parallels from Matt. 5-7
(except for Luke 6:20-49) makes this assumption highly improbable: Luke
would have broken up the well-arranged Matthean structure without
replacing it by an equally reasonable narrative structure. But again, includ-
ing Men in the discussion changes the picture completely. Instead of a
detailed verification I simply list the texts in question with their most
important proof from the heresiological literature:
1. Matt. 5:13
2. Matt. 5:15
3. Matt. 5:18
57)
//
//
//
Luke 14:34-35 (parable of salt):—
Luke 11:33 (parable of light): Tert. 4.27.1.
Luke 16:17 (imperishability of the law): Tert. 4.33.9.
4. Matt. 5:25 //
5.
6.
7.
8.
9. //
//
//
//
//
Matt. 5:32
Matt. 6:9-13
Matt. 6:19-21
Matt. 6:22-23
Matt. 6:24
10. Matt. 6:25-34 //
11. Matt. 7:7-11 //
12. Matt. 7:13-14 //
13. Matt. 7:22-23 //
Luke 12:57-59 (on reconciling with your opponent): Tert.
4.29.15.
Luke 16:18 (on divorce and re-marriage): Tert. 4.34.1, 4.
Luke 11:2-4 (Lords prayer): Tert. 4.26.3-5.
Luke 12:33-34 (on collecting treasures):—
Luke 11:34-36 (parable of the eye):—
Luke 16:13 (on serving two masters): Tert. 4.33.1-2; Adam.,
Dial. 1.26.
58
Luke 12:22-31 (on anxiety): Tert. 4.29.1-5.
Luke 11:9-13 (Gods answering of prayer): Tert. 4.26.5-10;
Epiph.42.11.6(schol.24).
Luke 13:23-24 (the narrow gate):—
Luke 13:26-27 (warning against self-deception): Tert. 4.30.4.
Of these 13 pericopes, only four are unattested for Men (numbers 1, 7, 8,
and 12); the majority of this material (38 verses) is positively attested for
Men by Tertullian and Epiphanius. Since both of them checked through
their copies of Men following the arrangement of the material, these
instances appeared in Men clearly in their "Lukan" order and place. Only
nine verses are not attested. This does not mean that Men did not contain
these passages but only that the witnesses do not mention them. The over­
all picture confirms not only Lukes direct dependence on Men but also
demonstrates that Matthew collected the material for the composition of
the Sermon on the Mount from different places in Men.
5. The last set of examples is the Minor agreements between Matthew and
Luke within the triple tradition material Their case is in particular difficult,
since there is no agreement between critics and defenders of the 2DH
concerning the number of minor agreements, their exact definition, and
significance. The leading question of this test, however, drastically restricts
the relevant instances. This is in particular true for those really "minor"
agreements on a level where they make litde or no semantic difference so
that it is hard to distinguish whether they really do indicate literary depen­
dence on a source or rather represent typical editorial practice or individual
style. 59 Testing these agreements in Men would require an exact reproduction
of his text which the witnesses almost never provide. Due to the character
of the sources whose accounts of Men are incomplete, the so-called negative
agreements where Matthew and Luke both omit a Markan text do not provide
reliable proof: in these instances it cannot be decided whether Men or his
witnesses are responsible for the omission. On the other hand, the coun­
tercheck fits into the picture: none of the negative agreements (e.g., the
omission of Mark 2:27 in Luke 9:5 // Matt. 12:7-8) is attested for Men.
The so-called positive agreements, however, i.e. additions to and/or
alterations of the Markan text common for both Matthew and Luke, allow
for a reliable verification. The prime example is, of course, the addition of
the five words τίς έστιν ο παίσας σε to Mark 14:65 in Luke 22:64 and
Matt. 26:68. This agreement plays a major role in the current debate as it
did in earlier discussions, because it is really damaging to the concept of
Matthew and Luke being independent on one another according to the
2 D H . 6 0 The attempts of the defenders of the 2 D H to explain this agree­
ment are not at all convincing: one explanation considers difficulties in the
manuscript tradition where these words could either have been lost in
Mark or have later been added in Matthew from Luke or vice versa by way
of assimilation. 61 But why should the manuscript tradition be unreliable in
just this particular case? If this argument was valid, the complete discus­
sion of gospel relations, except for a few examples, would be illegitimate
for the first two centuries. Another argument in defense of the 2 D H is the
suggestion that Luke did not only rely on Q b u t occasionally also on Mat­
thew. 62 But this would annul the basic assumption on which the whole
theory rests: the principal independence of Matthew and Luke. But none
of these constructions is necessary, since the words in question are well
enough attested for Men. 6 3
This is the only one of the three examples used extensively by Good-
64
acre that allows for a check against Men. But there are other instances. In
the Markan version of the pericope about the true relatives (Mark 3:31-5
par.), Jesus is being told that "his mother and his brothers and his sisters are
65
seeking him outside." Luke (8:20) and Matthew (12:47) agree in leaving
out the "sisters" (a negative agreement) and in adding that they were
"standing outside" (εξω έστήκασιν). This is exactly what Tertullian read in
66
Men. Similarly, in the parable of the mustard seed, Luke and Matthew
use a formulation different from Mark: Mark describes the action of sow­
ing in the passive voice and does not name a subject. Both Matthew and
Luke use the active voice, mention the subject and note that the man
67
threw the seed on his own soil. Tertullian, again, attests this very phrase
68
for Men. A last example is the annunciation of Jesus' passion and resur­
rection (Mark 8:31 par.): Mark dates the resurrection "after three days
(μετά τρεις ημέρας)," whereas Matthew (16:21) and Luke (9:22) both give
the ordinal number "on the thirdasy (τη τρίτη ημέρα)", as does Men. 69
In all these cases the minor agreements between Matthew and Luke can
be traced back to Men: Mens redaction of Mark was responsible for minor
changes that show up in Matthew and Luke. This proves that both Mat­
thew and Luke used Men, even if Matthew s main source was Mark. But
Men is not the only origin of the minor agreements, for there are further
examples which do not as easily fit into this explanation. The scene of Jesus
being captured displays a number of minor agreements between Luke
22:49-51 and Matt. 26:51-52 which require a different explanation, since
Epiphanius explicitly marks these verses as absent in Men. 70 But because
Epiphanius and Tertullian contradict each other in a few instances, this is
not absolutely certain, in the story of the healing of the obsessed boy, how­
ever, the problem is unambiguous: in Jesus' reprimanding the disciples,
71
Luke and Matthew agree in a small addition against Mark. In this case,
both Tertullian and Epiphanius agree in their account of Marcions text
which does not contain the addition we find in Matthew and Luke: in this
72
instance Men is clearly not responsible for the agreement. This means
that there is not a single explanation for the minor agreements. In this case,
the assumption of an influence from Matthew on Luke seems inevitable,
which corroborates that there was, in fact, a bi-directional influence: from
Men to Matthew and from Matthew to Luke.
The function of the examples I have mentioned so far is to test the reli­
ability of the basic assumption of Men's priority to Luke and to see how
the picture of the synoptic relations changes when Men is included as an
element of the synoptic tradition. Before I hint at some conclusions, it is
helpful to get a clearer picture of the processes within the synoptic tradition.
If the interrelations are schematized in a diagram, the picture that comes up
looks like this:
1. The bold arrows (1, 2, 3) indicate the main influence within the
synoptic tradition, "main influence" here meaning that the post-texts
adopt not only the general narrative oudine from their pre-texts but also
display, at least partially, verbatim agreements. The bold arrow (2) states
what is obvious: Matthew is basically a re-edition of Mark, although
enriched with further material. The new element in the picture is the
influence (3) from Men to Luke. On the assumption of Mens priority,
there is no doubt that Luke followed Men very closely: as far as can be told,
Luke did not interfere with Mens wording substantially. Men is, in other
words, a sort of Proto-Luke.
2. Since I did not closely investigate the relation between Mark and
Men, the direction of this relation (1) is, at this point of the discussion, a
mere guess: Supposing that the influence runs from Mark to Men, the
arrow (1) indicates that Men is an altered and enlarged re-edition of Mark:
Men followed Marks overall narrative order and even borrowed from his
wording. In this process, Men made some editorial changes: he included
some additional material, e.g., *6:20-49; *7:l-28, 36-50; *15:1-10; *16:1-
17:4 and so on. About the origin of this material nothing can be said. But
Men did not only make additions to Mark, but also left out some of the
Markan materials. The most notable omissions are Mark 1:1-20, the mate-
rial that is known as the "great omission" (Mark 6:45-8:26), or the end of
the Markan Parable discourse (Mark 4:26-34). At least for the "great omis-
sion" it seems plausible that Men did not catch the artistic structure and its
meaning of this Markan passage 73 and left it out for editorial reasons.
3. The dashed arrows (a, b) indicate an additional but minor influence
of Men on Matthew and on Luke. In some respect, (a) and (b) most clearly
show the advancement of this "Markan priority with Men" hypothesis:
with respect to the far-reaching conformity between Men and Luke, the
dashed arrows (a, b) indicate a bi-directional influence within the double
tradition: there are elements running from Men to Matthew and others
from Matthew to Lukes re-edition of Men.
4. Matthew is basically a re-edition of Mark (2) but also received addi-
tional material from Men (a) which is mosdy congruent to Mens addi-
tions to Mark. Along this line, Matthew received the bulk of the double
tradition material that is now embedded in Matt. 4-27.
The following is only a rough overview about the passages attested for both Men and
Matthew (the references refer to the supposed text in Men): most of the material that
is known as Luke's sermon in the field (Men *6:20-49); the healing of the centurions
boy (*7:1-10); John the Baptists question (*7:18-23); on following Jesus (*9:57-62);
commissioning of the apostles (* 10:1-11); thanksgiving to the father and the beati­
tude of the disciples (* 10:21-24); the Lord's prayer (*11:1-4) and the teaching about
prayer (*11:9-13); parts of the exhortation to fearless confession (*12:2-5, 8-9); teach­
ing on anxiety (*12:22-27, 29-32); interpreting the times (*12:54-55); reconciliation
with one's accuser (*12:57-59); the parable of the leaven (*13:20-21); the parable of
the great supper (*14:15-24); the parable of the lost sheep (* 15:3-7); concerning the
law and divorce (* 16:16-18); on forgiveness (* 17:3-4); the parable of the good and the
wicked servants (* 12:41 -46).
Considering Matthew's redaction of these passages, it is clear that Matthew
did not follow Men blindly, but carefully edited and re-arranged what he
found in Men to be additions to Mark. This is particularly apparent from
the story of the woman anointing Jesus, in which Matthew (26:6-13) did
not follow Mens revised version (*7:36-50) but Mark (14:3-9). Further­
more, Matthew left out a substantial part of the material that is well attested
for Men. 7 4 These "omissions" underline that Matthew followed Mark
closely and inserted additional material occasionally only.
5. Interestingly, Matthew received the triple tradition material on two
different routes, either directly from Mark (2) or on the detour via Men
(1, a). So there is a double influence on Matthew within the triple tradition
material. Of course, both Men and Matthew made changes on this triple
tradition material which now show up in Matthew and Luke: these are
the major and minor agreements. In some instances, as in the most famous
example of the addition of the words τίς έστιν ό παίσας σε (Matt. 26:68 //
Luke 22:64 * Mark 14:65), these changes can be attributed to Men. In
other cases, the alterations of the triple tradition material within the dou­
ble tradition seem not to have originated with Men but with Matthew.
At least this is what the examples of Jesus' greeting Judas in Gethsemane
(Matt. 26:51-52 // Luke 22:49-51 * Mark 14:45-46) or of Jesus' reprimand­
ing his disciples in the healing of the obsessed boy suggest (Matt. 17:17 //
Luke 9:41 * Mark).
6. Similarly to the two-fold influence on Matthew (2 and 1, a), there is
a two-fold influence on Luke: Luke received from Men, both directly (3)
and by the interposition of Matthew (a, b). But Luke's editorial process
appears to be different as compared to Matthews. Whereas Matthew
inserted the material from Men carefully and in many different places
into the "Markan" narrative, Luke s additions from Matthew to his main
source Men are quite different. The most severe influence along (b) relates
to the beginning of the gospel: the complete material of Luke 1:1-2:52 and
3:lb-4:15 is absent in Men. Whereas the birth stories display some
differences, Jesus' genealogy and the complete tradition about the Baptist,
Jesus' baptism and temptation is clearly handed down to Luke from Mat-
thew. 75 Besides this large addition in the beginning, there are only a few
minor influences from Matthew on Luke along (b), e.g. Luke 11:49-51
(from Matt. 23:34-35) or Luke 12:6-7 (from Matt. 10:29-30).
7. Among the texts Luke received from Matthew is the pericope about
the sign of Jonah (Luke 11:29-32 par.). This very interesting example belongs,
in the terminology of the 2DH, to the "Mark-Q-overlaps" and provides a
perfect insight into the route of the tradition: the origin is clearly Jesus'
refusal to give "a sign to this generation" (Mark 8:11-12). Matthew, who
followed Mark's lead, read it in the same context (Matt. 16:1 -2a, 4), but in
addition to Mark characterized this generation as "evil and adulterous"
(16:4). Interestingly, he employs a verbatim parallel to 16:1-4 in 12:38-39.
In both places, Matthew specifies that the only sign granted to this genera-
tion was "the sign of Jonah." In contrast to 16:4, however, he explains the
metaphor "sign of Jonah" in 12:40b-4l by parallelizing Jonah's three days
and nights in the belly of the monster with the Son of Man's three days and
nights the in the "heart of the earth" and adds the logion about the queen
from the South standing up "against this generation" (12:42). Men, how-
ever, knew only the Markan version. Epiphanius gives a detailed account,
stating that Marcion "cut out that about Jonah, the prophet. He had, how-
ever, 'This generation, it will not receive a sign.' He did not have (that)
about Nineveh and about the queen from the South and about Solomon." 76
Luke, who generally follows Men very closely, is in this case clearly depen-
dent on Matt. 12:40-42, as the references to the Ninevites, the Son of
Man, and the queen from the South clearly show (Luke 11:30-31).
8. A direct Markan impact on Luke, here indicated by the dotted arrow
(<:), is not necessary for the argument: if (c) was only a postulate, it would
not hold up against "Occam's razor". Not only is it hard to believe that
Luke did not know Mark, it can be demonstrated: Luke received the par-
able of the wicked husbandmen (Luke 20:9-18) not from Marcion. 77
Instead, his version shows influence from Mark. 78
9. Just as Mark composed his gospel from traditions of which we do
not know the origin, all the other three gospels used additional material
besides the known (or: suggested) influence indicated by this diagram.
Since there is no hint whether this material is derived from additional
sources or represents influence from oral tradition or is simply the result of
the evangelists' authorial fiction, I do not indicate this material. But it
should be noted that in all cases the composition of gospel material was
more than simply the editorial addition of sources. Concerning Matthew,
this material is basically what is generally known as Matthew's special
material ("M"). In Luke, this material is constituted by all the passages that
are absent from Matthew and that are specifically reported as "omitted" for
Men. Besides editorial changes on existing texts, the amount of indepen-
dent pericopes added by the Lukan redaction is considerably small as com-
pared to the Lukan special material "L", as it appears from the perspective
of the 2DH. Epiphanius, who regards these Lukan additions as Marcionite
omissions, observes the most important differences "at the beginning, in
the middle, and at the end." 79 In "the beginning", Luke added the pro-
logue, the infancy stories (most likely under Matthean influence) and the
editorially important additions in 4:16-30. 80 In "the middle", Luke added,
best to other texts, in particular the parable of the prodigal son (15:11-32). 81
Marcion's gospel ended with *24:43, so the ascension and the disciples'
return to Jerusalem are Lukan additions as well. 82
So far, the diagram and its additional explanations should provide the
general idea of how the picture changes when Men is included in the solu-
tion of the synoptic problem. When I discussed this model with my stu-
dents, they immediately responded that it was too complicated to be
convincing (which was somewhat discouraging at the moment). But how
complicated is too complicated? In order to assess the question of com-
plexity, I return to the recent debate for three consequences.
First, the general picture confirms the critical arguments brought for-
ward from both sides against their respective counterparts. On the one
hand, "Q" is, indeed, "dispensable." The inclusion of Men avoids the
methodological weakness of the 2DH with regard to the minor agree-
ments and the hypothetical character of "Q": Compared to "Q", Men is
clearly less "hypothetical", even though its text must be critically recon-
structed from the sources and even though its place within the maze of the
synoptic problem requires careful assessment. On the other hand, the basic
observations that led to the hypothesis of "Q" in the first place, i.e. the bi-
directional influence within the double tradition, are equally confirmed.
The postulate of a single dependence of Luke on Matthew (or of Matthew
on Luke) oversimplifies the complexities of the inter-synoptic relations.
But it is neither possible nor necessary to establish such a single depen-
dence. Instead, the inclusion of the "proto-Lukan" gospel which was used
by Marcion easily explains the ambiguity of the material. 83 Particularly
with respect to the 2DH the burden of proof has shifted to those who sug-
gest the existence of "Q" in order to explain the synoptic relations.
Second: What seems to make this picture complicated at first glance,
indicates a major shift in methodology when compared to 19th century
source-criticism. Although the 2DH tried to overcome the blockades of
single dependencies, it is still basically oriented towards the simple usage of
sources: it only augmented the number of relevant sources. Although the
inclusion of Men is a similar augmentation of "sources", the evolving pic-
ture is different: whereas the 2DH tried to explain the complexity of the
data by the addition of two basic sources (Mark + Q), the inclusion of
Men demonstrates that both Matthew and Luke received their triple tradi-
tion material via two different routes: Matthew read Mark directly and
in its revised edition in Men, and Luke used Men both directly and in
Matthews revised and enlarged edition. Since Luke, as it was demon-
strated, also did know and use Mark, Mark was present in all stages of the
synoptic tradition. The editorial procedure of both, Matthew and Luke,
was not a mere addition of "sources" but a comparison of texts and con-
cepts. This is fully consonant with the insight of the redaction history that
the evangelists were ambitious and competent authors rather than mere
editors. The mutual inter-dependencies create the complex maze of the
synoptic tradition which, as a result, must be regarded as a much denser
process than the 2DH suggested.
Finally, it is clear that this paper only intends to open the window for
further discussion: I am fully aware that I am far from seeing all the impli-
cations and consequences of this suggestion, neither within the realm of
the traditional issues of the synoptic problem nor the historical conse-
quences that lie beyond it. But since this model provides a solution of the
contentious issues of the present debate, it may help to break the deadlock
in which the discussion of the synoptic problem seems to be caught for too
long now.