My interest in this manuscript was stirred up when I came across an early
variant from the story of the rich man and Lazarus (Luke 16:19-31). It
follows P 75 in giving a name to the rich man. It reads: O*HS¿¿ *-O-A»»I (ονόματι
Νινευής). 1 This was the key variant which triggered my enthusiasm to
study its variant readings in the Gospel of Luke. Some of the findings
are included in this article. 2
It is generally believed that the VorUgen of the Arabic Gospel Manuscripts
are Greek, Syriac, Coptic or Latin. An examination of over two hundred
manuscripts shows that Greek and Syriac were the chief source. 3 The
majority of these manuscripts originated in and around Palestine and
Syria. It is still not clear when the Gospels were first translated into
Arabic. Some would argue for a pre-Islamic date (pre-seventh century, as
early as the fourth/fifth century) and others during the Abbasid period
(post-750 A.D). This debate will not be discussed here. It is worth noting,
however, that the common ground between both schools is that during
the ninth century the Gospels in Arabic had been extensively copied and
used, and that the majority of the ninth century manuscripts are copies
of earlier manuscripts.
Some have believed that the Arabic manuscripts of the New Testament,
with the exception of the Arabic Diatessaron, have little to offer to textual
criticism. 4 This paper aims to show that this perception can no longer be
maintained: the Arabic Gospel manuscripts have much to contribute to
the history of the transmission of the text, as well as to enhancing our
knowledge of the biblical tradition.
The article will focus on the textual features of the Gospel of Luke. I
shall begin with a concise description of the codex, and then introduce the
critical apparatus followed by discussion of the Vorhge of the Arabic text.
A general conclusion will follow the Apparatus. This article is intended
as an introduction to a full edition of this manuscript, to be presented
in a separate volume.
The only reference to Sinai ar. N.F. parch. 8 and 28 is found in Meimariss
Greek-Arabic catalogue of the Arabic manuscripts, published in 1985. 5
This is a catalogue of the Arabic manuscripts of the newly-discovered
Sinai Collection. The information given in the catalogue is minimal and
a new description should be given before any attempt is made to study
the two manuscripts textually. 6
MSS Sinai ar. N.F. parch. 8 and 28 were originally one codex, and
Meimaris seems not to have detected this. Sinai ar. N.F. parch. 8 ends with
John 17:25a and Sinai ar. N.F. parch. 28 starts with John 17:25b, so that
the text is continous. Moreover, linguistically, as well as on codicological
and palaeographic ground, there is no doubt that these two manuscripts
were originally one codex. 7 Therefore they will be referred to as "Codex
Sinaiticus Arabicus" (CSA). 8
CSA is a palimpsested parchment codex, originally with 144 folios in
18 quires of which 143 folios survived (the first folio is missing). Each
gathering is made of eight leaves. It is undoubtedly one of the earliest
surviving Arabic Gospel manuscripts. It was possibly copied in the second
half of the eight century or early ninth century. Layers of Greek, Latin,
and Arabic were detected in some of its folios, and this makes this codex
unique. Some of the Greek and Latin palimpsested texts might go back
to the fourth and fifth century.
The make-up of CSA is also unique; many of the folios of this codex are
made up from small pieces of parchment (some with four or five pieces for
each folio) and sewing these pieces into a folio would have required hard
work and perseverance. The size of folio varies throughout the manuscript.
It ranges between 170-190 cm long and 124-138 cm wide. The written
surface ranges between 155- 175 cm and 115-120 cm, with 24 to 29 lines
per page. All that has survived of the binding is a detached and worn-out
spine. The parchment is extremely thin and fragile, especially when it is
compared with ninth century Arabic Gospel parchment codices. Generally
speaking, the leaves are in good enough condition to enable us to read
the Arabic script and some of the palimpsested texts. Some of the folios,
especially at the beginning and the end of the codex are worn out on the
external edges. In a few places the original writing (mainly Greek) was
not scraped and washed off and so can be read easily.
The Content of CSA
CSA contains the following: (1) Sinai ar. N.F. parch. 8:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
An apology—the first folio of which is missing (folios lr-7r)
Matthew (folios 7r-44r)
Mark (folios 44r-65r)
Luke (folios 65r-102v)
John l:l-17:25a (folios 103r-127v)
(2) Sinai ar. N.F. parch. 28 continues with the following:
6. John 17:25b-21:25 (folios lr-7r)
7. A sermon g ¿mil) £9-^ LÌA^JUJ J^L-O ^J {In natalem Christi diem) by
Saint John Chrysostom (folios 7r-l4r) 9
8. A canon of the Apostles: & -N I \w II jü\ 9-0 &* IIA (folios I4r-l4v)
9. A sermon for the monks: ¿LAJJU AL·*. 9-0 (folios l4v-16v)
PaUeographic Features of CSA
The script is known as Küfic. It is copied using thick black ink. The text
seems to have been copied by one scribe. When a palaeographic com-
parison is made between this manuscript and other extant Arabic Gospel
manuscripts (of which over 200 have already been examined), it becomes
obvious that CSA has the least diacritical marks of them all.
The alif(i) has no turning of the hand to the right (the turning of the
hand to the right is common for manuscripts of Makkah and al-Madïnah),
but lengthening of the strokes to below the line.
The Dal, Dhâl and Käf have an upward stroke bend to the right of
the top of the letter.
The letters Säd and Däd, as well as the Käf are elongated horizontally.
The ending Fa, Ta and Ba do not have an upward stroke at the end
of the horizontal stroke.
The Nun looks similar to the modern Ra without a final upward
stroke.
The tail of the final Käf resembles the Ra in being elongated at the
beginning of the tail, vertically instead of horizontally.
The base stroke of the initial 'ayn is elongated backward to the right.
The tail of the final Lâm is similar to the modern Ra with a small
curve turning to the left.
Occasionally the tail of the final Ya extends horizontally to the right
and goes under the word.
There is little, if any, space between the words and, as a result, words
can be divided across lines. A pause in sense is sometimes indicated by
two forward slashes (//).
All these palaeographic features indicate the archaic nature of this
manuscript. Moreover, the defective writing of ûizAlif{ïot instance Baraka
instead o( Baraka; Kidas instead of kidäs) is a seventh and eighth century
feature and adds weight to the early dating of this manuscript. 10
Rubrics are present at the beginning of each Gospel (as well as of
Chrysostom's homily, the canon of the Apostles, and the sermon for
the monks). Moreover, there is one rubric in Matt 1:18 which reads AJIJÍ
JUJLI Λ . ut r (ju-uül ^À \yú ¿u¿ü (a second reading to be read in the mass
on Christmas night). This is the only liturgical calendar division in the
manuscript. The last rubric is found on folio lOr. It has been struck out by
the copyist. It might have come from a different source and have not been
erased properly. It reads j-o[Tia-iiJU] (ÜS «,ιΐΐϊ LJ, JUUUUJU ¿$JL> IJUÜ [
]
JL2J9 «Hîrlh J-o-c (jjL· &JL09 pLê$ IJUÜI ^J ¿$-S> <-*; L· c-JLi ^.iiJ.1 J±¿XÍ
(¿»¿Jul ££;9 ¿-¿fl$ UJXI (O-JÜJL) dJjjuuuo . Only the letter o in ÍJUÜ, ¿üxLb and
¿IJ^JUULO has the two dots, as well as the letter «_> in IJJÜI. All the rest are
left without diacritical marks. The dating of this rubric does not seem
to be much earlier than the Arabic text; it might even have been written
by the same hand.
The aim of the apparatus is not just the variant in question. I have provided
on many occasions the textual context of the variant to help the reader
to better evaluate the variant and the Arabic translation. In the apparatus
below the Byzantine reading 11 is presented first, then a square bracket
followed by the Greek reconstructed variant based on the Arabic text, then
the Arabic reading between brackets, and finally the Greek manuscripts
and the early versions which support the reading in question. The main
source of Greek and early version witnesses come from The Gospel accord­
ing to St Luke 12 as well as the Nestle-Aland 27th edition. The manuscript
sigla and signs are taken from the IGNTP, an explanation of which is not
given here since those who find this paper useful should be familiar with
them. It is worth mentioning, however, that the Greek Codex Sinaiticus
in IGNTP has the sigla S instead of κ. The patristic quotations are only
mentioned when none of the extant Greek manuscripts and early versions
supports an Arabic variant in question. This seems to be the case with
only one variant (see variant 21 below).
The variants selected are far from being exhaustive. The intention was
to select variants which disagree with the Byzantine text-type and which
are less likely to have coincidentally converged with Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Coptic etc. readings. This is a difficult task and requires a careful exami­
nation of each variant, as well as a wider knowledge of the translation
techniques which were used for making Arabic versions. When a variant
is ambiguous or doubtful (on whether or not it is a textual variant), the
preference in general was to include the variant rather than exclude it.
And by doing so the reader is provided with an opportunity to make his
own judgment.
Arabic as a Semitic language shares many of these techniques with the
Syriac language, so that our knowledge of the translation techniques used
in the Syriac versions can help us better understand Arabic translation
techniques. 13
This article does not allow the opportunity to expand on the tech-
niques used in Arabic translations. It is worth noting however, that
the general attempt of the scribes was to translate literally from the
Vorlage. Occasionally, the reader is left bewildered by sentences awkward
syntactically. 14 Yet divergence from the Vorlage happens. This divergence
is also present in other languages (e.g. Latin, Syriac etc.), so that Arabic
is not exceptional. It could have happened during the translation (because
of internal syntactical demands), or the copying process.
The list below gives guidelines to help us put little emphasis on variants
which seem to be merely of translation convenience and not necessarily
a reflection of a textual variant. These include:
1. Inclusion or omission of a definite article
2. Inclusion of possessive pronouns (e.g. oiuuo^lj instead of ÍO-QMLII),
especially inherent possession (e.g. ÙJU ; ¿uL>j)
3. Word order, especially reversal of paired items and subject-verb
transposition
4. Inclusion, omission and variation in the use of conjunctions (esp.
και and δε)
5. Inclusion of the name ^ u ('Ιησούς)
6. Replacing a pronoun in the Vorlage with a proper noun in the
translation
7. Addition of UJ^JI (Κύριος) to the proper noun ¿^-ULJ (Ίησοΰς)
8. The addition of objective pronouns, especially the following
construction: preposition + attached pronoun added to the verb
JLS (λέγω)
9. Variations in the number of the noun (esp. ol$U mll/*lq mil)
Coptic or Syriac is less likely to be the Vorlage of this manuscript. Many
of the textual and linguistic variants contained in these versions are not
reflected in the text of CSA. The two possible Vorhgen of this Arabic
version are Greek or an Old Latin version. Three hypotheses present
themselves: First, the version is translated from an Old Latin text and
thus becomes automatically less important for Greek textual scholars.
The second hypothesis is that the manuscript is translated from an Old
Greek Vorlage, which the latter shares traditionally with the Vorhge of
the Old Latin versions, and if so makes it of great value for both Greek
and Latin textual scholars. The third hypothesis is that this text has been
translated from Greek and then corrected at some point later against an
Old Latin text.
None of the hypotheses suggested above should be rejected in total.
The first hypothesis, a Latin origin, seems to be least likely, though not
impossible. The following argument aims to show the improbability of a
Latin origin. This will be done by giving a few linguistic examples and
then presenting textual evidence in favour of a Greek Vorlage.
The pool of linguistic variety found in the old Latin texts, and which
reflects not only textual Greek variants but also different linguistic ren­
derings of a specific Greek word, makes the argument of a Vorlage based
solely on linguistic features almost impossible. The first example below
reflects some of this reality.
a. In Luke 1: 3a the Greek reads εδοξε κάμοί. Friberg points out that
here the verb is "used with the dative of person and an infinitive to
express ones will or pleasure it seems best or good, decide (LU 1.3)". 15
The Arabic scribe seems to be familiar with this construction and
translated εδοξε κάμοί with L±J L»l O^-JO* (I was also pleased). The
Vulgate as well as the Old Latin witnesses (except Lvt b f 1 q) read
visum (perfect tense of video) and has the meaning of "to see, view,
behold, survey etc" and also "to please, like". 16 The Old Latin MSS
b f 1 q read here phcuit from placeo and means "to pleased or satisfied
with ones self". 17 The Arabic reading follows either the Greek or
MSSbflq.
b. Luke 1:3b the Arabic text reads ¿$i <>o ^¿¿4»! ¿>l (lit to follow
them from above). This ambiguous reading renders literally the
Greek άνωθεν (adv. "from above"—Latin desuper). This rendering
is not found in the extended Latin tradition. The majority of Latin
manuscripts read a pnncipio (at the beginning) and MS c reads ab
initio (from the beginning). This reading seems to follow the Greek
and not Latin.
c. Luke 1:3c The Arabic text translates Θεόφιλε with ¿11) <.M«>» (Θεό­
φιλε—the lover of God). This translation is hardly justified if the scribe
is translating from any language other than Greek. The Latin as well
as the Syriac transliterate this noun since it is considered a proper
noun. Latin has Theophile/Theofile/Theopile and the Syriac rdLaar^fcv.
This might show that the scribe was translating from Greek and not
Latin. However, it could also be possible that the scribe translating
from Latin was familiar with the Greek language and decided to give
the fidi Greek meaning of Θεόφιλε in Arabic.
d. Luke 10:25a the Arabic reads AJ^^J ¿±A$J pli ¿Lfc AJLC. The noun
£duo$j (noumik) is a transliteration of the Greek νομικός and is found
in Greek only. The Latin has Legis peritus. It is most probable that
the scribe is translating from Greek. Otherwise we would expect
dJLj^JüüJI f p í Τ O O r 4JBJ^JüüJI i ^ i QTÍ ΙΙΛ - S Í O.
e. Luke 11:45-6: Here once again the noun ¿^09-ì is found and is
repeated twice in plural. In Luke 11:45 we read j-o ±>\$ UÍL>I
jiih¿ofriJI {al-Noumìkiìrì) and in Luke 11:46 JJ»¿«QQ¡1I àJ (*S¡J$ JLLà
(al-Noumìkiìn). In both locations the Greek reads των νομικών and
τοις νομικοις respectively. The Latin, however, has Legis peritis.
f. Luke 12:6 The Greek reads έξωμολόγησεν from έξωμολογέω and
means "agree, consent," and also "praise, thank". The Latin has
spopondit/sponpondit from spondeo and means "to promise solemnly,
to bind, engage, to enter into an agreement" or "to warrant, give
assurance of". 18 The Arabic reads Q$J^ UM$ (and thank him) and
renders the Greek and not Latin Vorlage.
g. In Luke 21:30a the Arabic MS translates προβάλωσιν with J^>J
¿>$JI (sprout leaves). The Latin however, prefers fructus instead of
folia and translates with minor variations as producunt iam ex se
fructum. If the Arabic scribe is translating from Latin we expect
him to use J-OJ/O^J (fruit(s)) instead of ¿,9 (leaves). This certainly
supports the hypothesis of a Greek Vorlage. However, there is only
one Old Latin MS which reads folia instead of fructum is MS r 1 .
The fact that MS r 1 read folia makes the probability of a Greek
VorUge less certain. The following variant of the same verse might
push the argument a little bit further.
h. In Luke 21:30b the Arabic text reads c-u^i JLAJJ ¿Ι \^1ΔΛ. The
expression ¿L^M (harvest) has no textual support. The Greek has
θέρος (summer) and the Latin aestas (summer). The expression
jLaJ.| in Greek is (θερισμός) and has the same root as summer
(θέρος). Moreover, the first and last letters are similar, and replacing
one word with another word (with similar initials and endings) is
19
common in the transcription of manuscripts. The Latin however,
reads aestas (summer). "Harvest" in Latin is messis. The two words
do not share a common root (as is the case with Greek) and are far
from being similar. A mistake of this kind in unlikely if the scribe
was translating from Latin. It is more likely that the Greek is the
Vorkge of this verse.
i. Luke 22:17 and 22:19: In verse 17 Jesus "took the cup" and in
verse 19 "took the bread". The Greek has two different verbs for
"take". In verse 17 and 19 the verbs δέχομαι and λαμβάνω are used
respectively This distinction is faithfully preserved in the Arabic
text as opposed to the Latin witnesses. The Arabic has in verse 17
QuiS Jxi (δέξομαι) (a very unusual usage with the noun Q»IZ) and
in verse 19 1^-1 (λαμβάνω). This distinction shows that Greek and
not Latin is the Vorlage of this reading. The majority of Old Latin
MSS, as well as the Vulgate, have in both places accepto. MS d has
in both places accipiens, MS c has in verse 17 accepit and in verse
19 accepto, and finally MS e has accepit in verse 17 and omits the
reading in verse 19.
The few examples mentioned above favour a Greek as opposed to a Latin
VorUge. However, these examples do not eliminate the possibility that the
Arabic text once translated from Greek, has been subject to emendation
made against the Latin. This can hardly be proven and requires a more
thorough textual and linguistic examination of the text, and in general
the result is far from satisfactory The following discussion is an attempt
to show that textually, and not only linguistically, it is unlikely that this
manuscript has been translated from Latin.
The textual argumentation, on whether or not the Arabie text is translated
from Latin, all depends to what extent the extant Latin texts reflect the
holistic Latin tradition. If the extant Latin texts reflect very little of the
variants found in this tradition, a textual comparison of the Arabic and
Latin texts become less important and any hypothesis less conclusive. Since
the presupposition is that the extant Latin texts reflect part and not the
whole Latin tradition, no conclusive decision will be taken here.
The critical apparatus below shows that about seventy variants, out of
two hundred and thirty, have no textual support in the extant Latin texts.
Seven readings seem to follow only the Latin texts. 20
In addition, since the apparatus below overlooks variants which agree
with Byzantine text, another exercise is worth undertaking: finding vari-
ants which agree with the Byzantine text-type but disagree with Old Latin
witnesses. For instance, in Luke 23:25 the Arabic reads J¿eJI$ U n> mil
(στάσιν καί φόνον) and agrees with the Byzantine text-type. However, the
extant Latin manuscripts transpose and read homicidium et seditionem.
Here the Arabic disagrees with the Latin and is not referred to in the
apparatus below—simply because the Arabic agrees with the Byzantine
text-type (against the Latin). Another example could be Luke 9:1 The
Arabic reads JJUULC Lutfl £$-uu ^ - ^ (Συγκαλεσάμενος δε τούα δώδεκα) and
agrees with the Byzantine text (as well as Ρ 75 A Β D etc.) against the Latin
extant texts (except MS d).
In summary, although the apparatus below shows a close agreement
with Old Latin MSS, about 30% of the readings disagree completely
with the extant Latin MSS. Moreover, further investigation might show
some textual disagreement might be present between some Arabic read­
ings (supported by the Byzantine text-type, or Byzantine and Alexandrian
text-types against the Western text-types—and thus not mentioned in the
Apparatus below) and Old Latin witnesses.
If the first hypothesis is less likely to be the case, then the inclination is
to support the second or third hypothesis, which suggests an Arabic text
translated from Greek with or without being corrected against an Old Latin
text. The common factor between the last two hypotheses is that Greek
is the original Vorlage of this version. Anything beyond that is mere
speculation. It is almost impossible to know with some certainty whether this
manuscript has been corrected against the Latin or not. Take, for instance,
Luke 1:28. The Angel said to Mary ¿LL-O LJJJI Λ Q Τ \ Ì) AJLU L dJ (du*. This
is one of the most confusing verses in this manuscript. If the scribe is trans-
lating from Greek we would expect l^Jr fo-s^il (passive participle; Greek
κεχαριτωμένη) instead of Λ Q t \ t) 4±u L (full of grace), a reading found in
no Greek witnesses but rather in the Latin tradition; gratia plena (and also
the Peshitta rfàxo-m^ fcuisa; the Old Syriac is defective here). And if the
scribe is translating from Latin (or Syriac) we expect Λ Ο Τ ; tí ¿Lu L but also
benedicta tu in mulieribus (ευλογημένη συ έν γυναιξίν). The last addition is
omitted in the Arabic manuscript and disagrees with the Latin tradition (as
well as the Syriac Peshitta). The omission is only attested by S Β L W Ψ 1
131 565 579 700 1215 1241 1582 Sj (4 mss.) Cs Cb (mss.) Ar Gg (I). If
this manuscript is translated from or corrected against the Latin we expect
this important addition, "blessed art thou among women", to be present.
And if this manuscript is translated from Greek we expect l¿) Ar ^ΛΛ\
(κεχαριτωμένη) instead of Λ Ο Τ ; il 4±LO (gratia plena), unless the scribe was
influenced by external textual or liturgical factors. To suggest that this manu­
script is only translated from Greek, we find ourselves trapped with some
variants hard to justify, and to say that this manuscript is corrected against
a Latin witness, would not solve the problem that there are many important
variants found in the Latin tradition omitted in this manuscript.
I shall turn now to the apparatus of the textual variants of the Gospel
of Luke.
CSA seems to be a mixture of Alexandrian and Western text types. 23 The
apparatus above consists of 230 variants, 36 of which are not witnessed by
the extant Greek manuscripts. This does not mean however, that none of
them reflect a textual Greek variation. Some of the readings are witnessed
by more than one version, and might show a Greek Vorlage which has
not survived to our day. For instance, the variant in Luke 7:1a is attested
by the Old Latin MSS a aur b c fP 1 q, and also the Syriac Harclean ver­
2
1
sion. Luke 7:1b is attested by Old Latin MSS Lvt a b c ff 1 r , and also
the Syriac Sinaiticus, the Peshitta and Georgian versions. Luke 9:26b is
supported by the Syriac Curetonian and the Peshitta, and also Sahidic,
Bohairic and the Ethiopian versions. However, one should not eliminate
the possibility that some of them have diverged from the Greek Vorlage
because of internal linguistic demands and have coincided with readings
found in other biblical versions.
The apparatus reveals some valuable textual information, it includes:
The chart below shows the agreements between CSA and a specific Greek
manuscript. The first column has the MS number; the second column gives
the number of times a specific Greek manuscript agrees with the Arabic.
The number in brackets is the percentage based on the total number of
unit-variants of the Apparatus (230 unit-variants); the third column gives
the percentage based only on variants which have at least one Greek witness
supporting the variant in question (230 - 36= 194); and the last column
gives the average of the figures in column two and three.
The chart above clearly supports the hypothesis that CSA's Vorlage
is a mixture of Alexandrian and Western text types. The Caesarean is
unlikely to be the text type of the VorUge. Another important statistic is
that 50/230 (21.74%) (or 50/195 (25.64%)) are the number of variants
which agree with Codex Bezae against Codex Sinaiticus.
As far as the Latin MSS are concerned:
• 158/230 (68.70%) readings agree with one or more Old Latin MS/MSS
(and some Greek MSS etc.)
• 64/230 (27.83%) readings agree with one or more Vulgate MS/MSS
(plus Greek, Old Latin MSS etc.)
• 7/230 (3.04%) readings agree only with one or more Old Latin MS/
MSS
• 2/230 (0.87%) readings agree with the Vulgate (plus Greek, etc.) but
not the Old Latin MSS.
From the apparatus above, it seems obvious that there is a common
tradition behind the Old Latin and CSA. The chart below shows to
which Latin manuscript CSA is closer. (Fragmentary Old Latin MSS
were discarded.)
The chart above shows that MS d has the highest percentage of readings
which agree with CSA. The Old Latin d is the Latin text of Codex Bezae
(about 400 A.D.), 24 and the Greek text of this codex also agrees closely
with CSA.
Old Latin MS a of the 4th century, which is considered to represent the
early form of the European Latin text, has one of the highest percentages
(47.47%) as opposed to MS q (considered to have an Italian text) which
has one of the lowest percentages (25.32%).
MS e (which is, after k, the most important witness to the African
Latin text) has a relatively high percentage of agreements with CSA. If
we include the defective readings as a possible supportive to CSA (five
variants) then MS e will have a higher percentage than a.
Firstly, as far as the Coptic manuscripts are concerned, 101/230 read-
ings agree with one or more Bohairic MSS; 91/230 readings agree with
one or more Sahidic MSS. In general both the Sahidic and the Bohairic
versions agree with the Alexandrian text type. Nevertheless, it is gener-
ally agreed that the Sahidic has many Western readings, especially in the
Gospels and Acts.
Secondly, as far as the Syriac MSS are concerned, 75/230 readings
agree with the Sinaiticus; 64/230 with the one or more Peshitta MSS;
56/230 with the Curetonian; 50/230 with Syriac Jerusalem Lectionaries;
and three readings agree with the Syriac only.
Thirdly, 61/230 readings agree with one or more Ethiopian MS/MSS,
and 3/230 agree with the Ethiopian versions only.
Fourthly, 48/230 readings agree with the Arabic Diatessaron and two
readings agree with the Arabic Diatessaron only; 39/230 readings agree
with the Persian Diatessaron and one reading agrees with the Persian
Diatessaron only.
CSA has an unusual mixture of Alexandrian and Western text-types. On
the one hand there are variants showing clear affinities with the Sinaiticus,
Vaticanus, P 75 , P 45 (and also with the Sahidic (partially Alexandrian) and
Bohairic Coptic versions), and on the other hand with Codex Bezae,
Old Latin version, and the Syriac Sinaiticus text. Some of the readings
are extremely archaic; they are supported by a few of the earliest Greek
manuscripts, and reflect the archaic nature of the Vorkge. CSA agrees
with a relatively high number of Old Latin readings, but also Old Syriac
readings and reflects a Greek Vorhge which underlines both Latin and
Syriac traditions. Textually speaking, CSA stands as unique among the
extant Arabic Gospel manuscripts. It witnesses to the richness of the Greek
biblical text which was in circulation before the eighth century.
There are still important areas in CSA which need further investiga-
tion. A Greek reconstruction of the Arabic text (of the Four Gospels) is
first needed to help non-Arabicists to benefit most from this codex, and
to make their own contribution. An extensive textual examination of the
Four Gospels of CSA is certainly essential, and will follow this study in
the near future. A clear relationship between the Arabic text and old Latin
versions still needs to be established.
On a linguistic level, Arabicists might find this text crucial and a
publication of the Four Gospels is certainly worth undertaking. A closer
palaeographic examination might help us date it with more accuracy. It
remains extremely difficult to be confident whether CSA was copied in
the early eighth century, middle eighth century or early ninth century.
The second half of the eighth century seems to be most likely. The ques-
tion which remains unanswered is when the Archetype of CSA was first
produced. Is it in the fifth, sixth or seventh century? This question may
never receive a satisfactory answer. All that we know is that the text of
CSA was in circulation in the eighth century.
The geographical location of this manuscript is still a mystery. Generally
speaking the ninth century Arabic Gospel manuscripts have emerged in
South Palestine and Syria. Is this true for CSA? Should we consider other
possibilities? Which church did this manuscript belong to? What kind of
relationship exists between CSA and other Arabic Gospel manuscripts of
the ninth century? All these questions await an answer.
It is the authors hope that this article will stimulate interest in the
Arabic gospel manuscripts, so that, with the involvement of more scholars,
new light may be shed on the history of the biblical text.