In the final part of the 2006 volume of Novum Testamentum (48/4) an
article was published which responded to an article I had published earlier
in the same year in New Testament Studies} Here I seek to do two things.
First to briefly re-state the case that I made in the original article, and
secondly, to respond briefly to the personal attack that was made against
me in the article. 2
In my original article the identification of five pieces of textual or arte-
factual evidence that have been suggested as demonstrating the much ear-
lier existence of the text from Akhmîm (10759) identified as the Gospel of
Peter was questioned. These five pieces of evidence are: (i) P.Oxy. 2949; (ii)
P.Oxy. 4009; (iii) P.Vindob. G 2325; (iv) Ostracon (van Haelst Nr. 741);
and (v) P. Egerton 2. Without doubt the two most significant pieces of
data covered in the discussion are fragmentary texts from Oxyrhynchus,
known as P.Oxy. 2949 and P.Oxy. 4009 respectively. The first has a partial
overlap with G.Pet. 2:3-5 in the initial part of its text, but then goes its
own way. The second has no overlap with the extant portion of text discov-
ered as the initial text in a codex unearthed during the Winter season dig
of 1886-87 at Akhmîm. The identification of this text as part of the Gospel
of Peter is made on the basis of a multiple stage argument. First P.Oxy.
4009 contains a first-person reference (probably in a narrative context),
λέγει μοι. Secondly, it was argued that this fragment parallels a dialogue
between Jesus and Peter that occurs in 2 Clem. 5.2-4. Thirdly, it was sug­
gested that a first-person version of this incident with Peter as the character
speaking in that voice must be a fragment from the now no-longer extant
portion of the Gospel of Peter. Apart from the highly convoluted and
speculative stages in this argument, it is also based upon a large-scale puta­
tive reconstruction of P.Oxy. 4009 which in effect aligns it closely with
2 Clem. 5.2-4, when actually the only significant item of vocabulary that
the two texts definitely share is the term λύκων//λύκους—although in
different cases. While reconstruction of fragmentary texts is an important
activity, it must be conducted with some controls. Scholars will obviously
differ in relation to the level at which they set such controls. However, in
the present case the limits of plausibility are perhaps becoming too strained.
This is due to a number of factors. The lack of shared terminology, the high
level of creative reconstruction, the necessity to posit an intermediate stage
based on the text of 2 Clem. 5.2-4, and also the need to account for the
inversion in the order of the "serpents and doves" saying which is not in
2 Clem., but is part of the reconstruction of P.Oxy. 4009.
For these reasons, although based on a more detailed discussion, my
original article strongly refuted the notion that P.Oxy. 4009 could be seen
as a fragment of the Gospel of Peter. The other fragment, P.Oxy. 2949, was
seen as having some kind of relationship to the text of G.Pet. 2:3-5,
but the failure to take account of divergence between the two texts has too
readily led to the suggestion that P.Oxy. 2949 is a second-century exemplar
of the Gospel of Peter. Rather the possibility should be considered that
P.Oxy. 2949 might reflect an evolving literary, or oral tradition that fed
into the text that was discovered at Akhmîm, or even that both P.Oxy. 2949
and the Akhmîm text had independently reworked a common tradition
that stood behind both of these texts.
Such arguments mainly, but not exclusively, interacted with the work of
Prof. Dieter Lührmann, a distinguished scholar in the field of New Testa-
ment, especially in his work on non-canonical texts. Prof. Lührmann has
taken strong exception to my disagreement with his proposed identifica-
tions of P.Oxy. 2949, P.Oxy 4009, P.Vindob. G 2325 as fragments of the
Gospel of Peter, along with my rejection of the Ostracon (van Haelst
Nr. 741) as containing a description of the apostle Peter as a "gospel-writer".
Although his article made no direct criticism in regard to the central argu-
ment concerning the incorrect identification of P.Oxy. 2949 and P.Oxy.
4009 as fragments of the Gospel of Peter, there were a number of other
points made by Prof. Lührmann concerning aspects of the original article
to which I now respond.
First Prof. Lührmann suggests that I have never seen the fragments, 3
which is in direct contradiction to what is claimed in my article. He
bases this on his assumption that I say that I consulted the fragments of
P.Oxy 2949 and P.Oxy. 4009 in the Bodleian Library and not the Sackler
Library. Here the record must be set straight. I do not say that I consulted
the fragments in the Bodleian, rather it is stated that they are "held in the
Oxyrhynchus Papyrology Collection of the Bodleian Library in Oxford". 4
Here the reference related to the vexed issue of ownership and responsibil-
ity for housing the Oxyrhynchus fragments. The reference to the Egyptian
Exploration Society which occurs later in the footnote was suggested by
Nick Gonis, the reference to the Bodleian as the umbrella organization
responsible for housing the fragments was actually suggested by a librarian
in the Sackler, although maybe the even more generic Oxford University
Library Services might have been preferable. Regardless of nomenclature,
I am in the fortunate position of having resided in Oxford for four years
and over this period have consulted a number of Greek manuscripts in
various locations. I have consulted the two Oxyrhynchus fragments under
discussion on at least three occasions. Prof. Lührmann is correct that they
were housed in the Ashmolean prior to being accessed through the Sackler,
and in fact on my first visit to view the fragments I entered through the
Ashmolean.
My article is also deemed deficient because I simply list the dating of
the Akhmîm text as being 7th to 9th century. Here I follow the original
publication report and a number of later scholars who adopt this dating. 5
Prof. Lührmann lists a host of datings (the majority which fall in the period
7th to 9th century), 6 but some which date the text to either the 6th or even
the 5th centuries. While I am fully aware of the debate surrounding the
dating of the Akhmîm text, this simply was not my argument in the article.
In order to keep the discussion focused I engaged only on those questions
that were central to the main argument of the article, namely that the texts
that have been claimed as providing evidence for the existence of the Gos-
pel of Peter in the second century upon close scrutiny do not bear the
weight of this claim.
Prof. Lührmann also objects to my phrase "Crossan and Lührmann"/
He argues that "Die Reihenfolge 'Crossan and Lührmann (8-10) schließlich
macht mich gegen alle Logik, unbewusst oder vielleicht doch gewollt, zu
einen Gefolgsmann von Crossan, ohne dass die sich dazu einstellenden
Assoziationen ausgesprochen werden müssen". 8 Contrary to what is sug-
gested above, the reconstruction given by Crossan was treated first to
"remove" it from the discussion, prior to moving on to the more detailed
case mounted by Prof. Lührmann. The actual formulation "Crossan and
Lührmann" was not intended to suggest Prof. Lührmann was a mere fol-
lower of Prof. Crossan, the names were simply given in alphabetical order.
I was unaware that such an ordering could prove controversial, and unre-
servedly apologize if this caused any unintentional offence.
Finally Prof. Lührmann suggests that somehow I managed to slip my
article through the rigorous security measures of New Testament Studies.
He states, "Bedauerlich, dass ein Aufatz wie dieser die Sicherungsvorkeh-
rungen einer so renommierten Zeitschrift überwinden konnte". 9 Again, it
must be pointed out that not only was my article peer reviewed in New
Testament Studies^ but that it had been read at the biblical studies seminars