In an article written in Novum Testamentum ten years ago, Abraham J.
Malherbe made an important contribution to the interpretation of Luke
12:13-34. His study demonstrates "the extent to which the entire text
is shot through with items from the topos on greed." 1 Reviewing the delib-
erations on covetousness by Greco-Roman philosophers and moralists—
especially Dio Chrysostom's Oration 17—Malherbe identifies several
conventional themes for the topos περί πλεονεξίας ("concerning covetous­
ness"). He then argues persuasively that Luke employs many of these
conventions, including the superfluity of covetousness (12:15), the insa­
tiable dimension of greed (12:16-21), and the theme of anxiety (12:22-32).
Malherbe observes, however, that Luke is not slavish in his development of
the topos on greed, for the third evangelist also places his own particular
2
theological stamp on it. One of the significant outcomes of Malherbe's
analysis is that he shows how Luke 12:13-34 can be read as a coherent unit
with its own inner logic.
The following study is intended to complement the work of Malherbe.
I suggest that much light is shed on the unity and logic of Luke 12:13-34
when one reads it as an elaboration of a saying, or chreia, of Jesus concern­
ing covetousness. Specifically, I submit that this passage contains all of the
elements that are outlined in a progymnastic exercise attributed to the
second century C.E. rhetorician Hermogenes of Tarsus—elements that,
taken together, make up what classical rhetoricians called the "complete
argument." Where Malherbe brings the world of Greco-Roman moral
philosophy to bear on his interpretation, this study applies insights gained
from the arena of rhetorical education—or more precisely, of a pre-
rhetorical handbook exercise. And where Malherbes analysis illuminates
several material features of the Lukan text, this study focuses more on its
formal aspects.
In what follows, I set forth the steps of Hermogenes s elaboration of a
chreia (Part II). Then, after suggesting how Luke 12:13-34 aligns with the
Hermogenean form of a complete argument, I offer an analysis of the pas­
sage by means of this template (Part III). I conclude with some observa­
tions on the significance of this study. It is first necessary, however, to
justify using a text of a school exercise that/w.tf-dates Luke's gospel in order
to interpret a passage contained therein (Part I).
This question actually contains two questions—one that concerns dating
and another that concerns relevance. First, the question about chronology:
how does one avoid the charge of anachronism? That is, how can a text
3
attributed to Hermogenes —thus dated to the latter half of the second
century C.E.—be used as a template for reading Luke 12:13-34? As we
will see in Part II, the eight steps of Hermogenes's progymnastic exercise
περί χρείας ("On the Chreia") resemble very closely the components that
make up what the author of the Rhetorica ad Herennium calls "the most
complete and perfect argument" (absolutissima et peyfectissima argumen­
tation} Based on earlier Greek sources, the Rhetorica ad Herennium is a
rhetorical handbook from the early first century B.C.E. 5 Hermogenes's
elaboration exercise was thus not something de novo, but rather a develop­
ment of a pedagogy that was established well before the time when the
evangelist Luke received his education.
The latter observation leads naturally to the question concerning rele­
vance. For the past quarter century, New Testament scholars have become
increasingly aware of the importance of understanding the rhetorical train­
ing of early Christians who put into writing stories and traditions about
Jesus, including the authors of those texts that were eventually canonized.
As George A. Kennedy has observed, it is crucial to appreciate that "the
writings of early Christians beginning with the gospels... were molded by
the habits of thinking and writing learned in schools." 6 The progymnasmata—
handbooks containing exercises for students who, having completed their
basic grammar and literary courses, were beginning their formal rhetorical
education—are surely a valuable source for gaining insight into such learned
habits of thinking and writing." In this vein, Todd Penner has recently
called scholars to "reshift" their rhetorical focus by attending to progym-
nastic pedagogy, to "the mental formation that is promoted by the exer­
8
cises themselves
" There is thus a growing appreciation of the relevance
and importance of the progymnasmata for New Testament studies in gen­
9
eral and for the gospels in particular. The burden of the following sections
is to show the relevance of a single exercise, Hermogenes's περί χρείας^ for
understanding the mode of argumentation and the logical progression of
Luke 12:13-34.
Περί χρείας is the third chapter of Hermogenes's Progymnasmata.TM The
author begins by offering a definition of the chreia: "a reminiscence of
some saying or action or a combination of both which has a concise resolu­
tion, generally for the purpose of something useful" (lines 2-4). n Next he
classifies chreiai into three forms: sayings-chreiai, action-chreiai, and mixed
(sayings + action) chreiai (lines 5-15). He then distinguishes chreiai from
reminiscences and maxims (lines 16-26). According to Hermogenes, the
chreia differs from the reminiscence in that, where the latter tends to be
lengthy, chreiai are concise. 12 The chreia also differs from the maxim in
that, where the latter is expressed in a simple statement by no particular
character, chreiai involve a historical person and are frequently expressed
with a question and answer. Following a brief comment about the different
species of chreiai (lines 27-29), Hermogenes moves on to "the chief mat-
ter," namely the elaboration (εργασία) of a chreia (lines 30-62). The elabo­
ration exercise consists of the following eight steps: 13
(1) A note oí praise (έπαινος) for the one who spoke (and/or acted)—
This brief encomium (έγκώμιον) functions both to introduce what follows
and to establish the ethos and authority of the figure in question.
(2) The chreia (χρεία) itself, which is to be amplified—In terms of the
complete argument, the recitation of the chreia is tantamount to propos­
ing a thesis statement.
(3) The rationale (αιτία)—Because by their very nature chreiai tend to
be provocative, even enigmatic, they require an explanation. The rationale
serves to provide such explanation. Burton L. Mack observes that the
rationale has both interpretive and argumentative purposes. It is interpre­
tive in that it selects or isolates a point to be developed. The argumentative
aspect arises from the fact that the chreia and rationale together constitute
an enthymeme, a rhetorical syllogism in which a premise or conclusion is
left unexpressed (but which should be ascertainable from the overall con­
text). Mack then points out, "Taken together, and viewed as argumenta­
tion, the combination of chreia plus rationale establishes the primary proof
or basic argument." 14
(4) A statement of the opposite or contrary (κατά το εναντίον)—Techni­
cally speaking, the actual elaboration begins here (and continues through
Step 7). This first supporting argument operates by inverting the terms of
the rationale. If after inverting the terms of the rationale the resulting state­
ment makes sense, then the truth of the chreia (thesis) is bolstered.
(5) A statement from analogy (εκ παραβολής)—The second supporting
argument appeals to the natural and/or social orders to corroborate the
chreia. An effective analogy succeeds by showing that what is claimed in
the thesis statement pertains to other orders of observable reality. Indeed,
the strategy is to suggest the universal truth of the original claim.
(6) A statement from example (εκ παραδείγματος)—The third support­
ing argument enlists a well-known figure from history who illustrates in
dramatic fashion the general principle contained in the chreia. The effect
is the establishment of an important historical precedent.
(7) A statement by an authonty (εκ κρίσεως)—The last supporting argu­
ment enlists one or more authoritative figures from the past who have, in
their own ways, advocated what is set forth in the thesis statement. When
the thesis calls for a particular action (or a warning against such), the author­
ities are usually taken from the canons of literature and philosophy.
(8) A closing exhortation (παράκλησις)—The elaboration concludes with
an admonition to heed the one who has spoken (and/or acted). 15
What is significant about this eight-step school exercise is that it practically
replicates the pattern established by Rhetorica ad Herennium for a complete
argument. 16 According to this treatise, such an argument is made up of the
following components: 1) a proposition (propositio), 2) a rationale {ratio),
3) a confirmation of the rationale (rationis confirmatio), 4) an embellish­
ment {exornatio), and 5) a summary {conplexio). 17 A little later the author
oí Rhetorica ad Herennium explains that the exornatio consists of four types
of argument: 1) an analogy {simile), 2) an example (exemplum), 3) an
amplification {amplificano), and 4) a previous judgment {res iudicata). 18 A
cursory comparison with Hermogenes's exercise reveals that the only item
missing in the lists in Rhetorica ad Herennium is the argument from the
contrary. Interestingly, this type of argument {contrarium) appears in yet
another list in Rhetorica ad Herennium—in the outline for the embellish-
ment of a theme or thesis {expolitio) . 19 The critical point here is that the
περί χρείαςprogymnasma was designed to train students to develop their
abilities to elaborate on a theme in such a way as to produce a complete
argument. Although this exercise was designed for students in the early
stages of their rhetorical education, its mastery would have demanded an
20
advanced level of training.
Precisely what is the logic embedded in the complete argument? Accord­
ing to the eleventh century commentator John Doxapatres, the particular
sequence of the elaboration exercise involved a rational progression. 21
Doxapatres compared the rationale with the main argument of a speech.
This corresponds to Macks observation that the chreia + rationale consti­
tutes the primary proof or basic argument. In terms of the actual elabora­
tion, Doxapatres insisted that the statement of the contrary has primacy of
place because it is a "demonstrative" argument. In contrast, the analogy
and example are "celebratory" arguments. The analogy precedes the exam­
ple because, logically, the general is prior to the specific; moreover, the
specific (i.e., the example) functions to corroborate the general. Doxapa­
tres then remarked that the statement from authority—which is an "unin-
vented" proof, and thus is more persuasive than "invented" proofs 22 —serves
as a ratification of the preceding arguments.
Having set forth the content of Hermogenes's περί χρείας exercise and
the logic of the complete argument, we are now in position to argue the
thesis of this paper—namely, that Luke 12:13-34 is an elaboration of a
saying of Jesus that follows closely upon the Hermogenean pattern.
A quick glance at this passage reveals that it contains a number of the ele­
ments found in Hermogenes's elaboration of a chreia. Following a request
to Jesus that he settle an inheritance dispute (12:13), we see the following
elements: an enigmatic and sharp retort from Jesus (12:14) followed by a
warning against covetousness (12:15a); a rationale or reason ("because
ones life does not consist in the abundance of his or her possessions"—
23
12:15b); analogies from nature (ravens and lilies—12:24-28); and clos­
ing exhortations ("sell your possessions and give alms"; "store up treasure
in heaven"—12:33). Moreover, the parable of the rich fool (12:16-20)
illustrates the fate of someone who believes that life consists in the abun­
dance of possessions, a principle that is the contrary or opposite of Jesus'
rationale in 12:15b. We also see that in this passage Jesus appeals to the
(admittedly negative) example of the "Gentiles"/"nations" (12:30) and
evokes a famous person from the past (Solomon—12:27). Finally, we see
Jesus alluding to his own authority as one who knows what God's good
pleasure is (12:32).
Given these observations, I propose the following structure as the basis
for the analysis that follows:
Two caveats before proceeding: First, my purpose is not to provide an
exhaustive analysis of Luke 12:13-34. Rather, I employ the template of
Hermogenes's elaboration in order to highlight and clarify the flow and
logic of the Lukan Jesus' discourse in these verses. To be sure, this passage
does not follow the Hermogenean form exactly, and it will thus be neces-
sary to flag important differences. Nevertheless, I suggest that, while Mal-
herbe is correct in arguing that the topos on greed is developed throughout
this pericope, there is a more fundamental structure that holds it together—
namely, a specific manner of argumentation that develops Jesus' warning
against covetousness through rationale, contrast, analogy, example, and
authoritative support. 24
Second, it is important to acknowledge the underlying complexity of
Luke 12:13-34. This passage consists of materials from Luke's special
source (12:13-15, an admonishment against greed; 12:16-20, a parable),
from Q(12:22b-31, teachings about anxiety [cp. Matt. 6:25-33]; 12:33b-
34, exhortations concerning possessions [cp. Matt. 6:19-21]), and from
the third evangelist himself. 25 Therefore, a certain degree of nuance is
required for my argument. Luke's production of a rhetorically complete
argument here is largely the result of arranging and editing materials
already available to him. Does such ordering of materials offer a clue to
what Luke means when he announces in the prologue his intention, using
various sources, to write a narrative "in proper order" (καθεξής—1:3)? I
will return to this question in the concluding section.
The passage begins with a request from "someone in the crowd" (τις έκ του
δχλου) who asks Jesus to arbitrate in a family dispute over inheritance. The
main function of 12:13 is to introduce the scene of a passage in which
Jesus warns against the dangers of greed. Obviously, the reader of Lukes
gospel is in no need of an introduction to Jesus at this point in the narra­
tive. Nor has there been any lack of honorific titles used in connection
with him. 2 6 Nevertheless, the fact that the unnamed man approaches
Jesus as one having authority and addresses him with a title of respect—
διδάσκαλε ("Teacher")—functions to enhance the portrait of Jesus. He is
clearly perceived as a person of learning and integrity, such as a scribe or
rabbi, who has authority to settle legal disputes and whose words carry
persuasive weight. 2 " Thus 12:13 not only introduces the scene but also
places Jesus in an authoritative role. How will he exercise that authority?
Jesus' response to the man's request is not, we can presume, what the latter
expected to hear: "Man, who appointed me as judge (κριτής) or appor-
tioner (μεριστής) 28 over you?" (12:14). The vocative άνθρωπε ("Man") is
here a term of reprimand, and the tone is acerbic and brusque. 29 Jesus'
pithy, confrontational reply fits Theon's description of a chreia—"a concise
statement or action which is attributed with aptness to some specified
character." 30 More specifically, it is a responsive chreia, a saying that answers
a question or request made by someone else. 31 Indeed, recall that, for
Hermogenes, the dement of responding to another is what distinguishes a
chreia from a maxim. Jesus' initial response unsettles expectations. He was
addressed as "Teacher" and was presumed to have the authority and com-
petence of a scribe for adjudicating an inheritance dispute. Jesus' sharp
question, however, indicates that he rejects the role of arbitrator in this
case. But his response also functions to raise a number of questions: Who
then is κριτής and μεριστής? What exactly is meant by the latter term? And
what role is Jesus going to take if not that of κριτής or μεριστής? 32
The last question is immediately answered in 12:15a. Observe that Jesus
does not reject being called "Teacher." Indeed, he immediately turns to the
crowd—note the addressees are αυτούς—and admonishes them: "Watch
out and be on guard against all [forms of] covetousness." 33 As we will see,
throughout the remainder of the passage Jesus assumes the role of teacher,
first warning the crowd against the dangers of greed (12:15-21), and then
exhorting his disciples to trust in God to provide for their needs (12:22-
34). I propose that his initial warning to the crowd in 12:15a functions as
an amplification of his initial response to the unnamed man of 12:13. 34
Recall that the Hermogenean exercise calls for an amplification of the chreia
itself. Luke thus expands on a historical recollection of Jesus' encounter with
a man who sought him out as arbitrator by adding a strong warning against
the dangers of πλεονεξία (likely taken from another Jesus-tradition). 35 In
doing so, the Lukan Jesus gives specification to the topos to be developed
(and which Malherbe astutely analyzes).
At this point, I anticipate an objection to combining Jesus' question to
the man in 12:14 with his warning to the crowd in 12:15a to form the
amplified chreia that serves as the basis of the elaboration to follow. Does
not the change in addressee argue against such a conjoining? In response:
Observe that the crowd has already been present since 12:1, where Jesus
started to instruct his disciples on the need to persevere in faithfulness in
the face of persecution. The man's intrusive question in 12:13 leads Jesus,
after an initial rebuke of the former's request, to turn to the crowd to warn
against covetousness. Given Luke's overarching concern about the right
use of possessions, this is a natural move for him to make. 36 Moreover, we
should not lose sight of the presence of the disciples who also hear this
warning. As we will see, Jesus directly addresses them again starting in
12:22 where he encourages them to trust in God to provide for their needs.
But this teaching also takes place within earshot of the crowds. As Joel B.
Green remarks, "Luke often portrays Jesus teaching one group in the hear­
ing of another because of the general suitability of Jesus' message." 3 Thus
the significance of the change of audience ought not to be overstated here.
Immediately following Jesus' warning against greed, he offers an explana­
tion: "because ones life does not consist in the abundance of his or her
possessions" (12:15b). 38 This explanation functions as the rationale for the
chreia. Recall from the discussion in Part II that the rationale entails both
interpretive and argumentative aspects. In terms of offering an interpreta­
tion, 12:15b makes explicit the theme of possessions (τα υπάρχοντα) and
introduces the theme of life (ζωή). 39 In terms of argumentation, the chreia +
rationale establishes the basic argument that is to be supported by the
remaining steps of the elaboration. Thus, the basic argument in 12:15 is,
skeletally: Beware of greed, for life consists in more than possessions.
Moreover, because this basic argument takes the form of an enthymeme, it
contains an unexpressed premise. The implicit premise is: covetousness
seeks fulfillment in the abundance of possessions. 40 Such a manner of
human existence is tragically illustrated in the parable that immediately
follows (12:16-20). But the Lukan Jesus' rationale raises a further ques­
tion: in what or, perhaps better, in whom does life consist? The answer to
this question is forthcoming only later in the elaboration. 41
Jesus then tells the crowd a parable to exemplify his warning against greed
(12:16-20). This parable functions to posit and illustrate a statement of the
opposite or contrary, which is the step in Hermogenes's exercise that fol­
lows the rationale (and which begins the elaboration proper). 42 Here Luke
adapts the Hermogenean form; that is, instead of giving a contrary state­
ment in propositional form, the third evangelist offers an argument from
the opposite via a parable of Jesus. In the context of Lukes complete argu­
ment in 12:13-34, 43 this parable communicates the position that, instead
of giving life, possessions in fact take away one's life.
Jesus' parable begins thus: "The land of a certain rich person produced
abundantly" (12:16b). It is noteworthy that the subject of the sentence is
χώρα, "land" or "field." Notice that the rich person—presumably a large
land owner—is not the agent of production here. Implied, of course, is
that it is God who is the provider of the man's abundance, a theme that the
Lukan Jesus will make explicit in 12:22-32. Seeing the abundant harvest,
in 12:17 the land owner soliloquizes (literally, "discusses with himself"),
"What shall I do, because I have no [adequate place] where I may store my
(μου) crops?" That the man consults only himself already points to the
answer at which he will arrive. Observe how, from the very beginning, he
excludes others—including God—from the "conversation." To say the
least, the land owner is far away from the righteousness set forth, for
instance, in Ps. 112. The latter is a song of praise of the person who fears
the Lord (Ps. 112:1) and who imitates God's generosity by dealing open-
handedly with others (112:5) and by distributing freely to the poor (1 \2'3). u
The land owner's decision is given in Luke 12:18-19. Still speaking to
himself, he resolves, "I will do this: I will tear down my barns (άποθήκας)
and I will build larger ones, and there I will gather all my grain and all
my goods. Then I will say to my soul, 'Soul (ψυχή), 45 you have many
good things laid up for several years. Rest, eat, drink, celebrate!' " There
are several striking features in these verses upon which to remark. First,
the repetition of first person singular pronouns points to the land owner s
self-centeredness. Second, the prevalence of future tense verbs indicates that the
man thinks he is in full control of his own future. 46 Third, the asyndeton
(that is, the suppression of conjunctions) of the climax of the soliloquy—
"Rest, eat, drink, celebrate (εύφραίνου)!"—reveals his supreme self-confidence
and -assertion. 4 ^ Indeed, as Bernard Brandon Scott points out, in Jesus'
way of telling the parable, the rich man at this point usurps the story from
48
the narrator, just as he has usurped the bounteous harvest for himself.
Let us now take stock of what we have learned about the land owner
from 12:17-19. Although already abundantly wealthy, he decides to keep
more (πλειον), thereby succumbing to πλεονεξία. His decision manifests
the view that life does consist in abundance of possessions, a view that
directly contradicts the rationale given in 12:15b. He completely ignores
the needs of others in his deliberations and thus fails to recognize that
wealth should be shared with those in need. 49 At a more fundamental level,
the land owner's fateful decision reveals his belief that he is in complete
control of his fate and future. He fails to acknowledge that God is the giver
of life and prosperity. In short, the rich man exhibits what Peter Rhea Jones
calls "practical atheism"—thinking and acting as if God does not exista 0
Finally, in 12:20, God makes a sudden appearance and intrudes on
the land owner's solitude. God confronts him, saying, "Fool (άφρων)!
This night they are demanding (άπαιτοΰσιν) your soul (ψυχήν) from you!
Now, to whom will belong the things you have prepared?" The rich man
is exposed and condemned as a "fool," a judgment made all the more
poignant by the alliteration and consonance between his last word—
εύφραίνου—and God's first word in reply—άφρων. Indeed, the epithet
άφρων recalls the words of LXX Ps. 13:1 : "The fool said in his heart, 'There
is no God.' " Moreover, God's words in Luke 12:20 make clear that posses­
sions do not give life. While most translations and commentaries take the
third person plural verb άπαιτοΰσιν (without a subject) as expressing the
divine passive—signifying that the land owner's life is now being demanded
by God—the sentence makes perfect sense grammatically and contextually
by taking "goods" (αγαθά in 12:19 = possessions) as the subject of the
verb. That is, it is the man's possessions that literally take his soul/life
from him. Dl
Observe how God's words in 12:20a reverse the rich man's words to
himself in 12:17-19. The one who solipsistically conversed with himself as
ψυχή is told that his ψυχή is now being demanded from him. Rather than
having "several years" to enjoy his possessions, he will die "this night." And
instead of having "goods" laid up, he loses the only thing of ultimate value,
namely life. Furthermore, God's rhetorical question in 12:20b hauntingly
sets forth the ephemeral quality of possessions. As Luke Timothy Johnson
remarks, "The shattering of his life and the scattering of his possessions are
equally outside his control." 52
Jesus' parable of the rich fool therefore serves two key functions in Luke's
elaboration. First, it expresses in dramatic imagery the inversion of the
rationale given in 12:15b. The land owner's working assumption—that life
consists in an abundance of possessions—is shown to be false. Rather, the
Lukan Jesus insists here that not only do possessions fail to give life, they
even take it away. This is to argue from the contrary or opposite. Second,
Luke's elaboration via an illustrative story takes up a critical theological
point. Recall that Jesus' harsh response in 12:14 left open the question:
Who is κριτής? Jesus' story suggests in no uncertain terms that it is God
who wall judge those who greedily hoard possessions and who do not
acknowledge God as the giver of life and goods. 53 God is thus portrayed in
12:20 as the κριτής who condemns those who conduct themselves as if life
consisted in abundance of possessions.
The Lukan Jesus then adds his own commentary to the parable in 12:21 :
"So it is with the person who stores up treasure for himself and is not rich
unto God." These words perform a Janus-like function. They look back as
a summary of what has preceded (12:13-20). They also look ahead to the
following verses, as two inter-related themes are introduced—treasure and
being rich unto God—that will become key components of Luke's further
elaboration.
Having warned the crowd against the dangers of covetousness, Jesus turns
his attention to his disciples to whom he directs the rest of this discourse
(12:22-34). :>4 In 12:22 Jesus offers guidance vis-à-vis possessions to his
closest followers—they are not to live as if attaining security were the real
meaning of life: "do not be anxious about [your] life, what you shall eat,
nor about [your] body, what you shall wear."^ Then, in 12:23, he grounds
this exhortation with a rationale that echoes 12:15: "For (γαρ) life is more
than food, and the body is more than clothing." While Jesus challenges his
disciples to avoid πλεονεξία, they are to strive for what is "more" (πλειον).
What this "more" consists of will become clear in 12:31. But first, the
Lukan Jesus offers two analogies from nature, the fifth step in Hermo­
genes's elaboration that produces a complete argument. In Luke's elabora­
tion, these arguments from analogy directly support Jesus' warning and
rationale in 12:22-23 (which are a refinement of the original chreia + ratio­
nale in 12:14-15).
The first analogy takes up the theme of life/eating/food. In 12:24 Jesus
instructs his disciples to "consider'V'think about" (κατανοείν) the ravens
(κόρακες)^ 6 What can one learn by observing ravens? They neither sow
nor reap; they do not have storehouses or barns (the same term, αποθήκη,
found in the parable of the rich land owner). Nevertheless—and this is the
crucial point—God feeds them. Jesus' teaching here echoes Ps. 147:9 and
Job 38:41, both of which proclaim that, when the ravens cry out for food,
God responds by providing them sustenance. Moreover, given that ravens
were considered byTorah to be unclean (Lev. 11:15; Deut. 14:14), God's
provision for them highlights God s superabundant goodness and perva­
sive care for all creatures. 57 The Lukan Jesus then argues from the lesser to
the greater {a minori ad maius): if God takes such care of the (unclean)
ravens, how much more will God provide for human beings who are of
much more value than birds?
The second analogy from nature picks up the issue of body/wearing/
clothing. In 12:27 Jesus bids his disciples to think about the lilies (κρίνα). 58
What can be learned from considering lilies? Although they neither toil
nor spin, they are clothed in more glory than the renowned Solomon,
whose glory (including his servants' vesture) took away the Queen of She-
ba's breath (1 Kgs. 10:4-5). Jesus then argues again from the lesser to the
greater in 12:28. Observe how he refers now, not to lilies, but to grass
(χόρτος—a possible allusion to Isa. 40:6-8): if God clothes the grass, which
is here today and gone tomorrow, how much more will God see to the
needs of people? 59
Recall from Part II that an effective argument from analogy has two
characteristics—it pertains to the empirical order and is universal in scope.
The Lukan Jesus' analogies in 12:24-28 reflect these characteristics. He
appeals to two highly observable phenomena, birds and flowers. And his
analogies are all-encompassing at three levels. First, as Robert C. Tannehill
notes, ravens and lilies function here as "resonant images for a reality that
extends far beyond them." 6 0 Second, as Richard J. Dillon points out,
12:22-28 contains a series of pairings—life/body, food/clothing, eat-drink/
wear—that imply totality. Third, by referring to the labors of men (sowing
and reaping) and women (spinning and weaving), Jesus' analogies sub­
sume "the two constituents of the human race at large." 61
How do the two analogies from nature advance Jesus' admonition against
greed (12:15a) and, more specifically, his exhortation to his disciples not to
be overly anxious about food and clothing? In the first place, they make an
anthropological point, namely that human beings are part of God's cre­
ation. Used in tandem with Jesus' rhetorical questions in 12:25-26—which
remind human beings of their creaturely limits—the analogies make clear
that human beings are in the position of receiving life. The a minori ad
maius mode of argumentation (12:24, 28) then adds the nuance that
human beings, who stand at the pinnacle of creation, make a special claim
on the Creator. 62 This leads to a second, even more fundamental point.
Similar to how Luke's narrative adaptation of the argument from the con­
trary led to a theological claim in 12:20—it is God who is κριτής—the
third evangelist's two-fold argument from analogy makes a theological
point. The Lukan Jesus now answers the second question raised in 12:14—
namely, Who is μεριστής? In 12:24-28 he presents God as the gracious
"apportioner," the giver of life who providently provides for the works of
creation. Jesus reveals God as the One who lovingly and wisely dispenses
what is conducive for life, especially for human beings. Therefore, what
was implied by the divine passive in 12:16 is now made explicit: God is the
provider of life and of what is needed to sustain it. 63
Before proceeding, a word about God as μεριστής (in the sense of
"apportioner"). 64 Admittedly, the substantive μεριστής is never used of
God in Scripture. God is, however, the subject (both implied and explicit)
of μερίζειν in contexts in which this verb means "to apportion," and
that which is apportioned provides sustenance for life. For instance, in
LXX Num. 26:52-56 God instructs Moses how to apportion the promised
land to the twelve tribes (using the passive of μερίζειν three times). The
sense of this passage is that Moses is to facilitate God s provision of the
land, taking into account the different sizes and needs of the individual
tribes. It is significant to note, moreover, that what God apportions to the
tribes is called Israels "inheritance" (κληρονομιά—the term used by the
man who approached Jesus in Luke 12:13). The same association of God's
provision of land to Israel as "inheritance" is made in LXX Jer. 12:14 and
LXX Sir. 44:23, except now God is named as the explicit subject of the
verb μερίζειν. The Lukan Jesus' analogies from nature expand this image
of God as μεριστής to include the latter's care and provision for all of cre­
ation, and especially for those people who respond to Jesus' proclamation
of the kingdom. 65
Immediately following the two analogies from nature, Jesus exhorts his
disciples, "And you (ύμείς), do not seek what you are to eat and what you
are to drink, and do not be anxious" (12:29). This admonition recapitu­
lates his exhortation to the disciples in 12:22. Then, in 12:30a, Jesus adds
the comment, "for all these things are [what] the Gentiles of the world
seek." 66 The latter remark functions in Luke's elaboration as a statement
from example—albeit a negative one—which is the sixth step of the Her­
mogenean exercise. As C.E Evans observes, this comment is the only
6
explicit characterization of the Gentiles in the synoptic gospels: ^ their
godless lives are marked by the endless pursuit for security. Jesus thus sets
before his followers the odious example of people who do not acknowledge
God and God's providential care. In failing to turn in trust to God as
μεριστής—as the beneficent provider of needs—Gentiles are shown to be
lacking in comparison with the unclean ravens, the lilies, even the grass of
the field. Surely the disciples can do better!
Does the Lukan Jesus resort to using only a negative example? Might
the reference to Solomon in 12:27 have deeper resonances than appear at
first glance? Recall from the previous section that Solomon serves here as a
point of comparison (with the lilies) in order to illustrate God s providen­
tial care for creation. The nature analogy, however, does not exhaust the
"thickness" of the reference to Solomon. On the basis of an "intertextual
reading," 68 I suggest that there is no better example than Solomon of the
type of human response that Jesus calls for in these verses, namely trust in
God as μεριστής to provide for one's needs. In his famous dream vision in
Gibeon (1 Kgs. 3:3-15), the young Solomon—after acknowledging his
small status before both God and the multitudes of Israel—begged God
for the gift of an understanding mind so that he might fittingly govern the
people. So pleased was God with Solomon's request that God not only
granted him what he prayed for but also long life and prosperity. Observe
how this story exemplifies well the basic points of Jesus' teaching in Luke
12:24-28: that his followers ought to turn in trust to God for help and that
God's provision is superabundant. The third evangelist thus employs the
negative example of the Gentiles and the positive example of Solomon to
give "flesh" to the teaching set forth in the analogies from nature. 69
The seventh step of Hermogenes's elaboration is the statement from authority.
If the foregoing analysis has merit, we should expect to find a statement
from some authoritative figure to bolster Jesus' warning against the danger
of πλεονεξία. The Lukan Jesus, however, cites neither Scripture nor any
great figure from Israel's past at this point. Nevertheless, the content of
12:30b-32 is suggestive of authority as Jesus himself discloses "insider
information" concerning God. That is, in the process of seeking to instill
in his disciples greater confidence and trust in God, Jesus refers to God as
"your Father" in 12:30b. God the generous μεριστής is now portrayed as a
loving father or parent who knows the needs of his children. Thus Jesus
reveals knowledge of God's knowledge. ° And in response to such a loving
God, he encourages his disciples to "strive for [God's] kingdom, and these
things [i.e., food, clothing, etc.] will be given to you" (12:31). Observe
that it is here that Jesus suggests what the "more" (πλειον—12:23) of life
involves, namely seeking the things of the kingdom. What this means pre­
cisely will become clear in the closing exhortations that follow (12:33).
Jesus' authority is even more evident in 12:32, a verse that is unique to
Luke: "Do not fear, little flock, because your Father has taken delight
(εύδόκησεν) in giving the kingdom to you." Two points are noteworthy in
this connection. First, the reference to Jesus' followers as "little flock"
evokes images of God as the loving shepherd of Israel (e.g. Ezek. 34:11-24;
Ps. 78:52-55); now it is Jesus who is the agent of God's care. 71 Second,
Jesus speaks as one who knows the mind of God, what it has pleased God
to do. 2 As one who has such knowledge of the ways of God, there is no
greater (human) authority to whom Jesus can defer. Thus his assertions in
12:30b and 12:32 function as statements from authority. And by having
Jesus himself speak with such authority, Luke adapts the Hermogenean pat-
tern in order to make a christological point that builds on 10:21-22—Jesus
as God's Son has privileged knowledge of the Father and of the latter's will.
As in Hermogenes's elaboration exercise, the Lukan Jesus concludes with a
series of exhortations in 12:33. These exhortations are grounded in what
God has already done—namely, God has not only given life and suste-
nance to the disciples (12:24b, 28, 30b) but also, and more importantly,
God has bestowed on them the kingdom (12:32). In light of these gifts,
Jesus first urges his followers to sell their possessions (υπάρχοντα) and give
alms (12:33). By doing so, the disciples will facilitate the in-breaking of
God's kingdom as they promote what Sharon H. Ringe calls "the ethos of
the reign of God." This reign is "not marked by poverty and deprivation
of material goods that are due to the competitive accumulation of posses­
sions, but by their abundance that flows out of God's own sufficiency and
generosity." 3 In effect, Jesus calls the disciples to take on God's character,
to imitano Dei, by being merciful and generous to others as God has been
merciful and generous to them. 4 Such generosity is also, on a practical
level, the most effective antidote to πλεονεξία. D Moreover, observe that
the reference here to υπάρχοντα forms a literary inclusio with the rationale
in 12:15b. There, Jesus told the crowd that life does not consist in the
abundance of possessions; now, he instructs the disciples on the proper use
of possessions—they are to be sold and given to those in need.
Jesus continues his exhortation in 12:33b: "Make for yourselves purses
that do not grow old, an inexhaustible treasure in heaven, where no thief
approaches and no moth destroys." With this admonition Jesus draws
on traditional Jewish piety that almsgiving brings heavenly reward." 6 He
thus portrays another aspect of God s role as κριτής: God will not only
punish those who hoard possessions (12:16-21) but also reward those who
strive for the kingdom by imitating the generosity of God as μεριστής.
Indeed, striving for heavenly "treasure" (θησαυρός), which is another way
of expressing the notion of being "rich toward God," effectively reverses
the earlier reference in 12:21 to "the one who stores up treasure for him­
7
self" (ό θησαυρίζων έαυτω). ' Finally, in 12:34 Jesus offers a maxim—"For
where your treasure is, there also will your heart be"—that functions to sup­
port the exhortations in 12:33 as well as the entire preceding discourse.
Jesus' lengthy discourse in Luke 12:13-34 follows the steps of an elabora­
tion of a chreia as set forth by Hermogenes in a school exercise designed
to produce a complete argument. To be sure, there are some important
differences between the Lukan account and the example set forth by Her­
mogenes. Luke places the elaboration of Jesus' initial question and warn­
ing on the latter's own lips. The third evangelist also has Jesus change
audiences, and the discourse is permeated with several exhortations. The
statement to the contrary must be extrapolated from a parable, while
the example of Solomon is embedded in an argument from analogy. The
explicit example (of the Gentiles) is a negative example, and the authorita­
tive statement comes from Jesus himself. Moreover, the materials of the
elaboration derive, for the most part, from already existing traditions. Nev­
ertheless, the formal similarities are striking, and using the Hermogenean
progimnasma as a template offers a way of understanding the progression
of the logic in the discourse.
A more complete treatment would require demonstrating how the inter­
pretation of 12:13-34 offered above sheds light on the passage's immedi­
ately preceding and following contexts as well as on the larger context of
Luke-Acts. Space limitations prohibit such further analysis here. Even so,
several significant features emerge:
(1) This study gives formal support for reading 12:13-34 as a coherent
literary unit. While Malherbe's article advances our understanding of the
passage's logical unity via elements from the topos on covetousness, my
analysis sets forth the argumentative progression of the discourse. Vernon
K. Robbins has raised the important issues of "culture-transmitting tradi­
tion" and of what early hearers of the gospel would consider as convincing
argumentation. 8 1 propose that this article contributes to that discussion—
which leads to a second point of significance.
(2) If my treatment of 12:13-34 is on target, then further investigation
of Luke's gospel in light of our knowledge of the various progymnasmata is
called for. Mikeal C. Parsons observes that, while such analyses have been
done on the speeches in Acts, there have been few such studies on the third
gospel. 9 This article, hopefully, makes a modest contribution to fill part of
that void.
(3) This study sheds further light on what Luke means when he explains
his purpose in writing. In 1:3 the third evangelist states that he intends to
offer an account that is "orderly" or "in proper order" (καθεξής). Johnson
has argued that Luke meticulously orders the events he relates so as to
show forth clearly God's plan of salvation behind those events. 80 My analy­
sis suggests that the third evangelist also organizes his materials so as to
create, at least in 12:13-34, a rhetorically ordered and persuasive discourse.
(4) Finally, this article brings to the fore the theological bases of the
Lukan Jesus' discourse. 81 Indeed, where Luke adapts and expands the steps
of the elaboration—in the argument from the contrary and the nature
analogies—he sets forth God as κριτής and μεριστής, respectively. More­
over, the fact that it is Jesus himself who offers the authoritative judgment
has important christological implications. While Malherbe succeeds in show­
ing how the third evangelist "christianizes" the topos on πλεονεξία, the
above analysis highlights the theological and christological dimensions
of 12:13-34.