Forty years ago O.H. Steck argued that the theme of the continuing exile of
God s people and the expectation for Israels full restoration were ubiquitous
in the literature of Second Temple Judaism. 1 This thesis has been taken up
anew in recent years with the hope that it would be of value in understanding
2
not only early Judaism but also Jesus and early Christianity. While these
arguments have sustained criticism, there can be no doubt that many Jews,
under the hegemony of either Greek or Roman rulers, believed that their
tenuous and incomplete possession of the land fell far short of the promise of
a glorious restoration such as was envisioned in Deutero-Isaiah, and cried
out in words that echoed Ezras prayer: "We are slaves today in the land you
gave to our ancestors" (Neh. 9:36-37). That is to say, many believed that Isra-
els history remained frozen in the period of exile. The hope that God would
fulfill his promises of old and restore glory to national Israel should be con-
sidered a dominant current of thought during the Second Temple period
that must have played some role in shaping the thinking of early followers of
Jesus. 3
In contrast to this trend of dealing with the continuing subjugation of
God s people to foreign nations by narrating Israels current history as an
extension of the exile, the epistle to the Hebrews proposes a very different
renarration of Israel's history. The purpose of this paper is to examine
Hebrews to determine in which period of Israels history the author believed
himself and his readers to be living. 4 It will be determined that, analogously
to the historical schema outlined above, the author of Hebrews believed that
the promises of God had not yet fully been obtained, 5 though, in a unique
move, he does not place himself and his readers in the time of exile but even
further back in Israel's history, into the time of the exodus and wilderness
wandering. 6 According to the author, Israel has been brought out of Egypt
but has never, even up until his own day, entered into the land that God had
promised them. This is significantly different than the suggestion of some
commentators that the exodus generation serves merely as a rhetorical or
typological example for the readers of the letter. 7 Throughout the letter, the
author demonstrates that the land of promise was never actually possessed
but only ever sojourned in, and thus all of Israels history subsequent to the
exodus belongs to the period of the wilderness wanderings. Such a radical
re-reading and reconfiguration of Israels history is demonstrated by the
explication of Psalm 95 in Hebrews 3-4, the retelling of Israel's history in
Heb. 11:1-12:3, and the envisioned end of Israels continuing exodus and wil-
derness wanderings as portrayed in God's people drawing near to the heav-
enly Jerusalem (12:22-29).
How does the author come to the conclusion that the exodus is continuing
since, according to the scriptural account, Israel entered Canaan under the
leadership of Joshua, dispossessed many of the inhabitants currently occupy-
ing the land, and set up its own monarchy that lasted a number of centuries
(Joshua-2 Kings)? In fact, Josh. 21:43-45 explicitly contradicts the authors
assertion that the people did not enter the Promised Land of rest: 8 "And
YHWH gave to Israel all the land that he swore to give to their ancestors
and they possessed it and they dwelt in it. And YHWH gave them rest
(κατέπαυσεν) on every side, according to all that he swore to their ancestors
and not one of all their enemies stood before them, YHWH gave all their
enemies into their hand. And not one word of all the good words that
YHWH spoke to the house of Israel failed; everything came to pass." 9
Such a positive summary of Israels entry into the land under the leader­
ship of Joshua is expressed again in Solomons lengthy dedicatory speech
for the temple in Jerusalem: "Blessed is YHWH today, who gave rest
(κατάπαυσιν) to his people Israel, according to all that he spoke; not one
word has failed of all his good words, which he uttered by Moses his ser­
vant" (1 Kgs. 8:56). 10 According to scripture, Joshua succeeded in leading
the people into all of God s promises; in other words, "Mission Accomplished!"
Nonetheless, the biblical results of the leadership of Joshua find no place in
the letter to the Hebrews. 11 Instead, the author provides an alternative read­
ing of Joshuas life, saying εί γαρ αυτούς Ίησοΰς κατέπαυσ εν, ούκ αν περί
άλλης έλάλει μετά ταΰτα ημέρας (Heb. 4:8). u This second-class condi­
tional clause demonstrates that, to the author, the idea that Joshua had given
the people rest is contrary to fact. 13 What enables the author to make a move
that appears to be in opposition to the biblical account of Israels history?
The answer lies in his understanding of the significance of Psalm 95 (LXX
Psalm 94).
Since it was traditionally believed that the Psalms were composed by
David, the fact that he could refer to another day when rest might be obtained
demonstrates that Joshua did not actually lead them into the rest that was
promised to them, yet even more so shows that, up until David s day, God
had not fulfilled his promise to bring his people into his rest. 14 The author
uses Psalm 95 to show that Israel never entered into God s promised rest and
that the exodus continued at least until the days of David. 15 If the people
remained in the wilderness until David s days, at what point in Israels history
could it be said that the exodus ended?
Further, numerous scholars have argued that Psalm 95 was written for use
in the liturgical life of early Israel, and the 'today of v. 7 referred to the festi-
val day on which the psalm was sung. 16 That is to say, the psalm was com-
posed in such a way that the prophetic warning contained in w. 7-11 always
referred to the hie et nunc} 1 It is possible that Psalm 95 was used liturgically
in the Second Temple Period, thus enabling the author of Hebrews to take
advantage of the ambiguity of the referent of 'today, and apply it to the days
of his readers. The author calls his readers to exhort one another while it
is called 'today so that none are hardened by sin after hearing God's voice
(Heb. 3:12-13). Similarly, through his emphasis on σήμερον, the author
contemporizes the warning of Psalm 95, demonstrating to his readers that
they are in danger of hardening their hearts. 18 Because it is 'today, the com­
munity members are to exhort (παρακαλείτε) one another so that none fall
away from the living God (3:12-13). 19 The fact that it can still be called 'today
means that the exodus never ended and that rest can still be obtained. 20
The second interpretive move made by the author is to stress the posses­
sive pronoun μου: "I swore that they would never enter my rest" (Heb. 4:5;
LXX Ps. 94:11). Though at Sinai God promised Moses that his presence
would go before the people and he would give them rest (καταπαύσω—
Ex. 33:14), in Psalm 95, this κατάπαυσις is no general rest but Gods rest
specifically. 21 "So then, there remains a sabbath rest for the people of God;
for the one who enters into his [God s] rest also rests from his own works
just as God rested from his own" (Heb. 4-.9-10). 22 Such a carefully delin-
eated rest, God's rest, must then be further explicated, which the author
does by linking, through the Jewish exegetical technique of gezera shawap
Ps. 95:7 with Gen. 2:2: και [θεός] κατέπαυσεν τη ήμερα τη έβδομη από
πάντων των έργων αύτοΰ ων έποίησεν. 24 Thus, the rest promised in Psalm 95
is associated with the primordial rest that God himself entered into after the
creation of the world, but where exactly is this rest? Jewish literature provides
two possible locations for Gods rest. For instance, Sir. 36:13 says: "Have pity
on the city of your sanctuary, Jerusalem, the place of your rest (κατάπαυμα)."
While the noun used for 'rest' here is similar to that used in Hebrews 3-4,
a closer parallel can be found in Ps. 132:13-14: "YHWH has chosen Zion,
he has chosen it for his dwelling: 'This is my resting place (κατάπαυσις)
forever, here I will dwell for I have chosen it'." 25 In Sirach and Psalms then,
God's resting place is expressly identified with Jerusalem. On the other
hand, Isa. 66:1 places God's resting place in the heavens: "Thus says the
Lord: 'Heaven is my throne and the earth is my footstool; what is the house
which you would build for me, and what is the place of my rest (κατάπαυσις;
MT—"iTuC)'?" For Trito-Isaiah, Gods rest is in the heavens, and therefore
the temple and Jerusalem cannot be the (sole) location of God s resting
place. Does Hebrews indicate which of these it envisions in describing
Gods rest, or does it somehow include both of these concepts? 26
This emphasis on God s rest facilitates the author s attempt to show that
the promise was never possessed in Israels history. Despite what the biblical
book of Joshua might say, Joshua and the people of Israel did not obtain
Gods promised rest δι* άπιστίαν (3:19). 2 As will be seen, it was not merely
this first generation that failed to enter into God s rest; the entire history
of Israel can also be read as a failure to enter that rest, albeit not explicitly
because of unbelief. It is true that the first generation serves as a warning, but
only in as much as the readers themselves are also in the exodus and wander­
ing period. Having set the scriptural foundation for his argument that Israel
has never entered into the land of promise, the author will provide a retelling
of Israels history in Hebrews 11 that further demonstrates this point.
The argument of Hebrews 3-4, that the wilderness generation never entered
God s rest, is expanded Hebrews 11. While the chapter is a retelling of Israel 
history, focusing on the πίστις exemplified by numerous Jewish heroes, it
also serves to demonstrate the unfulfilled nature of the promise throughout
Israel's history. 28 As Attridge notes, Heb. 11:1 does not provide an abstract
definition of πίστις, but rather provides "a programmatic remark for the
encomium that follows;" 29 faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the
proof of things unseen (ου βλεπομένων). 30 As the authors version of Israel's
history unfolds, it becomes clear that the things not seen are God's prom­
ised rest, that is, his unshakeable city (11:8-15). 31 Simply put, Hebrews 11
recounts Israel's history in such a way that the people of God never receive
the land of God's promise. Pamela Michelle Eisenbaum's recent monograph
on Hebrews 11 demonstrates convincingly that the chapter is more similar
to Jewish lists, with their interest in ancient personages and diachronic his­
tory, than Greco-Roman lists, which are more focused on recent historical
figures and less diachronic. 32 While she notes the repetition of πίστις through­
out the chapter, Eisenbaum argues that the underlying theme is that these
individuals are marginalized: "The study of Hebrews 11 in its literary envi­
rons leads me to conclude that the heroes of Hebrews share in common a
marginalized existence which situates them outside the national destiny of
Israel." 33 That is to say, although these figures belonged to historical Israel,
the author has portrayed them in such a fashion that they are now distinct and
separate from the nation itself. 34 Such a summary of the text, and the letter
in general, has one far-reaching implication for the place of Hebrews
within the literary landscape of the early Church: "Hebrews 11 represents
a significant point in the evolution that led from the understanding of Jewish
scripture as the ethnic history of the Jews to the theological history of
Christians." 3 ^ Is this true though? Do we have here, in nascent form, the
early Christian trend of dissociation from the fate of national Israel and the
re-appropriation of Jewish scriptures by Christianity?
The argument of this paper calls such a conclusion into question. 36
Instead of seeing these examples as separated from national Israel, we should
see them as exemplifying the author's claim that the long history of Israel,
up to the present day, belongs to the period of the exodus/wilderness wan-
derings. The marginalization portrayed in the author s presentation of these
Jewish heroes is not meant to sunder the relationship between them and
national Israel, rather it is meant to demonstrate that marginalization is
and has always been a sign that one belongs to God s people.
Abraham, the recipient of God's promise of an inheritance (κληρονομιά)
in Gen. 12:1-2, is portrayed as going out from what was known to what
was unknown. While κληρονομιά is not used in the LXX account of Abra­
ham's call, it nonetheless occurs in reference to the land throughout the
biblical narrative (cf. Gen. 15:7; 22:17; 28:4). 3 That Abraham is called an
alien in the land of God's promise does not mean that the author is stress­
ing the fact that he is not a real Israelite; instead, the author's stress on
Abraham's foreign status (παρφκησεν, άλλοτρίαν, σκηναις κατοικήσας)
highlights the fact that although Abraham and his sons were promised the
land, they never obtained it. 38 For the author's argument to work, the lan-
guage within the biblical accounts that speak of Abrahams time in the land
as a time of sojourning needs to be stressed to demonstrate that he never
actually possessed the land but was merely a foreigner there. 39 Despite his
alien status, Abrahams eyes were on a city with foundations (by way of
contrast to the tents he dwelt in) that was built by God (v. 10). 40 Then, in
verse 13, the author argues that all these died without having received the
promise (άπέθανον ούτοι πάντες, μη λαβόντες τάς επαγγελίας), acknowl­
edging that they were but "strangers and exiles in the land" (ξένοι και
παρεπίδημοι είσιν επί της γης). 41 This acknowledgment demonstrates that
they were still in search of their homeland.
The author's description of Joseph also fits this pattern (11:22). Why, of
all the deeds Joseph is well known for, does the author focus on his request
that his bones be brought out of Egypt? If the author were concerned with
demonstrating that Joseph was an example of someone alienated from the
nation of Israel, it would make more sense to mention his faith in response
to being sold by and separated from the rest of Israel. Instead, the hope of
the exodus points to the hope Joseph had regarding God's promise that his
people would enter the land of promise. 42 Josephs request that his bones
be brought from Egypt to the land of Canaan demonstrates that his immi-
nent death did not cause him to give up hope in God's promise. 43
Further, Eisenbaum has a difficult time explaining how Moses' alien-
ation from his Egyptian family provides an example of his alienation from
his people. 44 In direct contrast to her understanding, the author of Hebrews
stresses how Moses gives up the comforts of Egypt so that he can identify
himself with the people of God. Unity with, not marginalization and sepa-
ration from, the nation of Israel is the stress of the passage. 45 Then in his
leadership of Israel, his action of instituting Passover is what preserves the
people from the Destroyer (11:28), and becomes the critical event in God's
redemption of his people from slavery in Egypt. 46 Instead of focusing on
Moses leading the people across the Red Sea, the author expands his dis-
cussion of history to the entire nation (note the third person plural, rather
than singular, πίστει διέβησαν), 4 ^ again, demonstrating his concern for the
nation of Israel, not merely faithful individuals removed from their roles
within corporate Israel's history.
This interpretation of Hebrews 11 as a retelling of Israel's history as a
continuing exodus also provides a better understanding of the ending of
the list. Why does the author shorten his treatment of the heroes right at
the moment when the land is traditionally believed to be possessed? Accord-
ing to Eisenbaum: "The disorganized chronology combined with the list-
ing of several mediocre names is an allusion to what our author sees as the
dissolution of biblical history." 48 But, given our understanding, the ques-
tionable inclusion (and exclusion) of historical figures and loss of chronol-
ogy at the exact moment when, according to Scripture, Israel entered into
the Promised Land, point in quite another direction. In light of the author s
argument in Hebrews 3-4 that Joshua did not provide the promised rest
for the people, and that Israel still exists in the exodus period, it is under-
standable why the author seems to lose interest in history after the walls of
Jericho fall. 49 Rahab, on the other hand, receives explicit mention because
of her hospitality shown to the Israelite spies. 50 Were the author to attempt
to describe the faith of later heroes, he would have had to contend with the
difficulty that the stories assume the possession (or past possession) of the
Promised Land. The theme of the continuing exodus of Israel in Hebrews
also explains the puzzling absence of Joshua from the list of heroes. 51 Since
the author has already stated that Joshua did not lead the people into the
promised rest, how could he then use him as an example of faith? Further,
chronology ceases to be a matter of concern because time has, in effect, been
frozen so that no matter what a hero does, Israels story is still stuck in the
time of the exodus/wilderness wanderings. Despite the fact that these heroes,
by faith, conquered kingdoms, enforced justice, received promises, stopped
the mouths of lions, extinguished the power of fire, escaped the edges of
the sword, were made strong out of weakness, became mighty in war, routed
foreign camps, and received their dead by resurrection (w. 33-35a), the one
abiding fact is that Israel was still in the exodus. D2 The author concludes his
list by summarizing: "All these, though attested through faith, did not receive
the promise" (v. 39). In keeping with the implication that he draws from
Psalm 95, the author retells Israel's history as a people, who by faith live in a
way that demonstrates that the yet-to-be-realized rest can still be obtained. 53
Joshuas absence from the recounting of Israels history in Hebrews 11 is
remedied in the first verses of Hebrews 12. Here another Joshua, also an
αρχηγός, is portrayed as an exemplar of faith, who, through suffering, wins
the promise of God (4:l4). :>4 Unlike the Jesus of Jewish scriptures, this
Jesus is not only an αρχηγός, but is also a τελειωτής, of the faith exemplified
by Israel's heroes in Hebrews 11. The meaning of the uncommon christo-
logical title, αρχηγός (cf. Acts 3:15; 5:31; Heb. 2:10), has undergone con­
siderable scrutiny, ^ though whatever meanings were readily available to
readers of the text, it seems that the word refers most naturally, given the
narrative context of the exodus, to the leaders of Israel in the wilderness. In
Num. 13:2-3 Moses sends out twelve αρχηγοί who come back with an ill
report about the land and convince the people to fall back from entering
into God's promised land of rest. In response, the people actually cry out for
a new αρχηγός, one who will lead them back to Egypt. Then, during the
40-year period, the αρχηγοί again appear, this time in the company of Korah
(Num. 16:1-3), only to rebel against God and Moses. Finally, the αρχηγοί
are blamed for the fact that the people are marrying Moabite women and
are to be hung on a gibbet for it (Num. 25:1-5). The example of these lead­
ers to the nation during the time of the exodus was less than ideal. True,
two αρχηγοί, Joshua and Caleb, were faithful and as a result God promised
to give them entrance into the land, but the author of Hebrews silences
these biblical accounts in his retelling of Israel's history.
The first αρχηγός, Joshua, has already been described as failing to lead
Gods people into the land of rest; it is thus up to the second αρχηγός, Jesus,
to lead the people out of their wanderings and into Gods rest. According to
the author of Hebrews, Jesus does this through his death on the cross, resur­
rection, and subsequent cleansing of both the heavenly sanctuary and the
peoples consciences by his own blood (Heb. 9:12-14). 56 Having dealt, by his
blood, with the transgressions of the first covenant that hindered God's peo­
ple from receiving their inheritance, Jesus becomes a mediator of a new cov­
enant, opening up the way for Gods people to enter into Gods rest (9:15).
As a result of the priestly work of Christ, which the author discusses at length
in Heb. 6:19-10:18, Christ is enthroned as king, and now awaits the com­
plete subjugation of his enemies (Heb. 1:3-13; 2:5-10; 10:12; 12:2). 57 Yet, if
Christ has been crowned king and has restarted Israels stalled history, why
have the authors readers not experienced this new reality? 58
Hebrews 12 ends with imagery that again situates the readers in the wilder­
ness, placing them beyond Sinai (w. 18-21) and at the border of the land of
promise (w. 22-24). 59 It is not surprising that the rhetorical climax of the
letter discusses the climax of Israels history: entrance into Zion. 60 While the
author does not here employ the language of entering God s κατάπαυσις,
titles such as "Zion," "the city of God," and "the heavenly Jerusalem," con­
note the same idea, as evidenced by biblical and non-biblical passages that
equate Zion with the location of Gods rest (cf. Ps. 132:13-14; Sir. 36:13; 4
Ezra 8:52). 61 The importance of this city motif is illuminated by Josephus'
discussion of the wilderness generation, who were not able to enter into the
land as a result of άκρασία {Ant. 3.314), and would therefore be homeless
(ανέστιους) and citiless (άπόλιδας) 62 for forty years in the wilderness (3.314).
In response to this, the people cry out that God will "free them from wander­
ing in the wilderness, and provide cities (πόλεις) for them" (3.315). 63 Thus,
Josephus' wilderness generation is a people in search of a city. This is exactly
what the author of Hebrews has said Abraham and his descendents were in
search of (11:10, 13, 16), and in Heb. 12:22 the readers are portrayed as
those who are about to obtain it. The reference to the 'heavenly Jerusalem'
indicates that this is not merely the physical Jerusalem of Jewish scriptures,
but something more. 64 It is a city that will withstand the eschatological shak­
ing that God has in store for both heaven and earth (12:27-28) . 6D
The author, having narrated his readers into the point of the story where
Israel is about to enter into God s promised rest, begins the peroration 66 with
one final warning: "Let us worship God properly with reverence and fear,
for our God is 'a consuming fire (πυρ καταναλίσκον)' (cf. Deut. 4:24; 9:3)."
This final warning from Deuteronomy is balanced by what appears to be an
allusion to the promise of Deut. 31:6, 8 ("It is YHWH who goes before
you; he will be with you, he will not fail you or forsake you; do not fear or
be dismayed") contained in Heb. 13:5. 67 If so, the letter ends with both
warning and encouragement drawn from Deuteronomy, the point in Isra­
el's history where it is about to enter God s rest. 68
This paper has attempted to trace the theme of continuing exodus through
the letter to the Hebrews. According to the author, Joshua was unable to
lead the people into God's promised rest because of their unbelief. David,
writing hundreds of years later, attests to the fact that none have entered
into God's rest and that the promise still remains (Ps. 95:11). The author
re-reads Israel's history in light of this assertion to show that, from the
inception of the nation in the calling of Abraham up until the present day,
the exodus period has persisted. Nonetheless, the community is to be
encouraged by the fact that it is not at an initial stage in the exodus such as
Sinai (12:18-21) but has drawn near to the promised city of Zion, the city
of God's rest. The letter to the Hebrews thus envisions its audience at the
very spot that the book of Deuteronomy envisions the people of Israel—at
the doorstep of God's promised land of rest. By means of this rewriting and
reconfiguration of Israel's history, the author of the letter to the Hebrews
demonstrates to his readers that their experience is in continuity with the
entire history of Israel, and should be deemed as evidence for the fact that
they are God's children, to whom the long-awaited rest is still open.