The injunction in the Gospel of Matthew, "See that you do not despise
one of these little ones; for I tell you that in heaven their-angels always
behold the face of my Father who is in heaven" (Matt. 18:10, RS V), has had
a fascinating history of reception in early Christianity. As one would natu­
rally expect, much of patristic exegesis seized upon the obvious ethical impli­
cations of the passage. 1 Highlighting "God's special concern for the little
ones, for the humble and despised," is, according to leading contemporary
exegetes, the only interpretation by which Matt. 18:10 retains some rele­
vance for todays world. 2
There is, however, another side of the Wirkungsgeschichte that is well
worth studying, especially since many of its elements are generally over­
looked in scholarship. 3 In what follows, I will show how a number of writers
in the early centuries of the common era, whether so-called Jewish Chris-
tians, Valentinians, or members of the "Great Church," writing in Greek,
Latin, or Syriac, have used the Matthean "Face" and "angels of the little
ones" as building blocks for their emerging Christology and Pneumatology,
and how this exegesis of Matt. 18:10 resulted in what may be termed a "Face
5
Christology," and, as its correlative, an "angelomorphic" Pneumatology.
A few words to rehearse the current scholarly views on Matt. 18:10 are in
order at this point. This passage stands in between a section in which Mat­
thew was working off Mark (up to Matt. 18:9), and another section that
may perhaps come out of Q (Matt. 18:11-35). Among the dominical say­
ings in Matthew, Rudolf Bultmann judges Matt. 18:10 to be material "of
uncertain origin, though possibly Jewish," which was inserted into the new
Jesus-tradition (whether in the written period or even earlier), and thus
edited for Christian usage. Specifically, the redactional 10a ("Take care that
you do not despise one of these little ones") serves to connect the tradi­
tional logion in 10b ("for, I tell you, in heaven their angels continually see
the face of my Father in heaven") with the foregoing section on the little
ones. The resulting synthesis offers some insight into Matthews special
vocabulary and theology, and coheres well with his distinctive interest in
the association of angels with the Son of man or the devil (13:41; 16:27;
24:31; 25:31; 26:53; 25:4l). 6
The "little ones" are most certainly not children in the biological sense.
Some exegetes, patristic (e.g., Chrysostom, cited above) as well as modern, have
thought of a special category of disciples—those whom fellow-Christians are
likely to despise as socially inferior, spiritually distraught, recently bap­
tized, etc. 8 Matthews two categories—"the little ones" and those admonished
not to despise them—may also be part of a rhetorical strategy to address the
entire church. 9 Even though "the saying calls for some elasticity of inter­
pretation," 10 μικροί may have been a pejorative term, used originally by the
adversaries of the Jesus-movement, and later embraced by Christians. 11 As for
the idea of angelic representatives in heaven, "twins" or Doppelgänger of the
believers, this must have been a popular belief, as it is echoed elsewhere in
the N T (e.g., Acts 1:15). 12
Scholars have noted that "the idiom 'to see the face o f here connotes
access to a sovereign
The addition 'always' indicates unrestricted access.
It is unusual to have such access to a sovereign, therefore all the more strik-
ing to have it to God." 13 Leaving aside the Mesopotamian background of
both courtly and visionary imagery, it should be noted that "already in the
Bible court language shifted towards religious and cultic language," 14 and
that the imagery of angels gazing upon the divine "Face" looms large in the
apocalyptic literature of Second Temple Judaism. lD
Matt. 18:10 shows that the apocalyptic themes of the Face and the angels
of the face remained important in early Christianity. The exegesis of this
verse among various early Christian groups allows us some insight into the
process by which, to recall Ernst Käsemann, apocalypticism engendered
and nurtured Christian theology.
Irenaeus of Lyon reports on the following invOcation of Sophia in certain
16
rites of the Marcosians:
O, companion of God and of the mystical Silence from before the aeons, through
whom the greatnesses that continually behold the face of the Father draw up their
1
forms (άνασπώσιν ανω τάς αυτών μοράς), taking you as guide and leader.. ,
I leave aside the larger context of the passage, and its various unclarities. 18
Sophia is here asked to help the initiated to ascend invisibly and to enter
the bridal chamber of their angelic counterpart. Matt.-18:10 is used in a
somewhat altered form: it is "the greatnesses" that continually behold the
face of the Father. Obviously, "greatnesses" here designates certain angelic
entities. These angels behold the face of God and function as the heavenly
counterpart of the Marcosian initiates on earth. Being "images" of the
angels who behold the face of God (εικόνας αυτών, as the text goes on to
explain), the initiates will reach their authentic being only when united
with their celestial models in the wedding chamber. 19
The designation of angels by the term "greatness" is illumining for other
related passages. Consider the following passage, cited as an example of the
various formulae and ritual actions by which Marcus would have over­
whelmed and recruited his patrons:
I wish to make you share in my Grace, since the Father of all continually beholds your
angel before His face (επειδή ό Πατήρ των όλων τον άγγελόν σου δια παντός βλέπει
προ προσώπου αύτοΰ). Now, the place of greatness is in us (ό δε τόπος του μεγέθους
ένήμιν έστι): it behooves us to be established in the One
Behold, Grace has
descended on you: open up your mouth and prophesy! 20
In this passage, Matt. 18:10 is alluded to, but in a modified form. It is not
the angel that continually gazes upon the face of God, but rather God that
continually keeps the angel before his face. "Your angel" corresponds to
"greatness" in the subsequent sentence, so that-the "greatness" abiding in
the initiate denotes to the presence of the angel. 21
According to Irenaeus, Marcus claimed to have received a supreme and
all-encompassing revelation. 22 At the center of this revelation lies the figure
of the Logos: as manifestation of the ineffable God, the Logos is the also
called "primal Anthropos," or "Body of Truth," and is composed of thirty
letters in four distinct enunciations. 23 As a crowning of the revelation, Mar­
cus is granted the auditory manifestation of this celestial reality: "Christ
Jesus." Marcus must have reacted with a certain disappointment, for he is
immediately scolded and instructed as follows:
You regard as contemptible (ως εύκαταφρόνητον) the word that you have heard from
the mouth of Truth? What you know and appear to possess is not the ancient Name.
For the mere sound of it is what you possess; but you do not know its power. Now,
' v Jesus" is a symbolic (έπίσημον) six-letter name known by all who are of the 'Mailing."
But [the Name] that exists among the Aeons of the Pleroma consists of many parts,
and has a different form and shape (άλλης έστιν μορφής και ετέρου τύπου), being
known by those who are joined in affinity (συλλενών) with Him, and whose great­
24
nesses are always (διάπάντος) present with Him.
This passage introduces the following teaching: the six-letter name "Jesus"
represents merely the "sound" of the celestial Name, which is all that those
25
of the "calling" (certainly the "psychic" Church) are able to comprehend;
the Marcosian initiates, instead, have access to the celestial Name, by virtue
of their (presumably "pneumatic") co-naturality; 26 finally, the "greatnesses"
of these initiates continually abide with the Name/Anthropos. 2
If one reads "greatness" as a term for angelic beings, as seen in the passages
quoted previously, this passage can be read as an exegesis of Matt. 18:10.
The Matthean admonishment is applied to those who would show con­
tempt for the revelation disclosed to Marcus (namely the celestial "Logos"/
"Anthropos"/"Body of Truth"). The "little-ones" are understood to designate
the Marcosian elite, who will be joined to their angels ("greatnesses") and thus
participate in the contemplation of the heavenly Anthropos.
A few paragraphs later, Marcus refers to the seven powers praising the
Logos. 28 Here "the angels perpetually gazing on the face of God" seem to
be a well-defined group of seven highest angels. I will expand on this point
later in this paper.
The following passage occurs in Ps.-Clem. Horn. 17:
Of His commandments this is the first and great one, to fear the Lord God, and to
serve Him only. But He meant us to fear that God whose angels they are who are the
angels of the least of the faith fid amongst us, and who stand in heaveyi continually beholding
the face of the Father. For He has shape (μορφήν), and He has even limb primarily and
solely for beauty's sake, and not for use. For He has not eyes that He may see with
7
them; for He stes on even side, since He is incomparably more brilliant in His body
than the visual spirit which is in us, and He is more splendid than everything, so that
in comparison with Him the light of the sun may be reckoned as darkness. Nor has
7
He ears that He may hear (for He hears, perceives, moves, energizes, acts on even
side). But He has the most beautiful shape (καλλίστην μορφήν) on account of man,
2q
that the pure in heart may be able to see H i m . . .
What affection ought therefore to arise within us if we gaze with our mind on His
7
beautiful shape (εύμορφίαν)! But otherwise it is absurd to speak of beauty. For beaut}
cannot exist apart from shape (μορφής); nor can one be attracted to the love of God
(τον αύτοΰ έρωτα έπισπασθαι), nor even deem that he can see Him, if God has no
30
form (είδος).
This passage in the Ps.-Clementina was apparently not part of the so-called
Basic Writing (now lost), but was introduced by the author of the Homilies,
who reworked it around 300-320 CE. 31 The homilist used a number of Jewish
and Jewish-Christian traditions. For the passage under discussion, there is
even solid evidence of a literary source, which was also shared by Clement
of Alexandria (more on this in the following section). 32
Before discussing doctrine of this fragment and its use of Matt. 18:10,
it is necessary to sketch out the polemical context of Ps.-Clem. Horn. 17.7-
10. The apostle Peter and Simon Magus disagree sharply over who or what
constitutes the "true God." To Simon s taste, the divinity of the Bible appears
crude and unsatisfactory, because it does not meet certain standards of per­
fection derived from metaphysical speculation. 33 Peter rejects Simon's higher
God as mere fancy, the result of an imagination harassed by demons, 34 and
affirms forcefully his attachment to the Biblical God who made heaven
and earth. 35 Hie passage from Ps.-Clem. Horn. 17 identifies this "true God":
not Simons abstract "great power," distinct from the Creator, but precisely
the Creator and Lawgiver, the Biblical God whose luminous and beautiful
form is enthroned and worshipped by angels. This anthropomorphic appear­
ance, which includes "all the limbs," such as eyes and ears, is, howe\^er, only
for our sake: God himself does not need eyes, ears, or any form; yet, unless
he showed himself in this most beautiful form, how could anyone long for
him, and gaze on him? 3 6
It is now possible to take a closer look at the use of Matt. 18:10. The
verse is crucial for Peters argument, since it serves as a means of identifying
"the true God." This "true God" is, for Peter, the one who is attended by
"the angels of the least of the faithful... who stand in heaven continually
beholding the face of the Father." Implied in such a description is the image
of an enthroned deity; and, as Peter adds immediately, the throne-imagery
implies that God has a form: "for He has shape and He has every limb."
The wording in Peters statements suggests that Matt. 18:10 is here com­
bined with Matt. 25:40. 3 The first and most obvious element to suggest this
is the replacement of των μικρών (from Matt. 18:30) by των ελαχίστων, the
term used for those whom the Son of Man calls his "brethren" in Matt. 25:40
(των αδελφών τών ελαχίστων). Secondly, the final part oí Horn. 17.7 (verses 4-6)
also evokes Matt. 25:40, 45. 38 By way of consequence, there is an overlap
between the "face of God" in Matt. 18:10, the enthroned Son of Man in
Matt. 25:31-46, and God's "form" or "body" which constitutes the heav-
enly "model" of-the human being.
It appears, in conclusion, that the use of Matt. 18:10 in the Ps.-Clementine
Homilies is not very different from that of Irenaeus' Marcosians. Even though
the theological frameworks of the texts are very different (one is dualistic, the
other rejects dualism, hence terms such as "God" or "Christ" mean different
things), both view the "Face of God" in Matt. 18:10 as the enthroned "form"
or "body" of God, which they identify with Christ.
The fact that the same exegesis of Matt. 18:10 occurs in Clement of Alex-
andria is very significant, because Clement has read all the material discussed
so far: Irenaeus' account of the Marcosians, the writings of the Oriental branch
4
of Valentinianism, as well as the source used by the Ps.-Clem. Horn. 17. °
Matt. 18:10 occurs five times in Clement of Alexandrias surviving writings:
Strom. 5.14.91; Excerpta ex Theodoto 10.6; 11.1; 23.4; Quis Dives 31.1. 4 1
Among these passages, the latter two are not relevant for the present inves­
tigation. The first one, however, displays an interesting formal variation.
The text reads:
But indicating "the angels/' as the Scripture says, "of the little ones, and of the least,
which see God" (των μικρών δε κατά την γραφήν και ελαχίστων τους αγγέλους τους
ορώντας τον θεόν) and also the oversight reaching to us exercised by the tutelary angels,
he shrinks not from writing: "When all the souls have selected their several lives, accord­
ing as it has fallen to their lot, they advance in order to Lachesis; and she sends along
with each one, as his guide in life, and the joint accomplisher of his purposes, the
demon which he has chosen." Perhaps also the demon of Socrates suggested to him
something similar. 42
Leaving aside Clements characteristic fusion of Biblical sources with texts and
writers authoritative for the Greek philosophical tradition, 43 it is noteworthy
that Clement supplements των μικρών in Matt. 18:10 with ελαχίστων. This
is, of course, reminiscent of the passage in the Ps.-Clem. Horn. 17. In fact,
as I mentioned earlier, Clement was aware of a text closely related to Ps.-
Clem. Horn. 17—most likely one of the sources used by the homilist in his
reworking the Ps.-Clementinian material. The influence of this source on
Clement of Alexandria includes a certain exegesis of Matt. 18:10. Before
entering into a more detailed discussion, however, it is necessary to sketch
out the doctrinal framework to which the exegesis of Matt. 18:10 is subor­
dinated.
On the basis of the tradition inherited from the "elders," Clement fur­
nishes a detailed description of the spiritual universe, which features, in
descending order, the Face, the seven first created angels, the archangels,
finally the angels. 44 The Face and all levels of the angelic world are charac­
terized by a certain corporality. 45 This corporality is only relative, however,
since the beings on any given level can be described at the same time as
"bodiless"—from the perspective of inferior ranks—, and "bodily"—from
the perspective of superior levels of being. 46
Most interesting is the use of Matt. 18:10 in this context. Clement of
Alexandria identifies the Face of God mentioned in Matt. 18:10 with Christ,
the Logos; quite naturally, then, he identifies the πρόσωπον of Matt. 18:10
with the χαρακτήρ of Heb. 1:3 and the εΐκών of Col. 1:15. 4
As for the "angels ever contemplating the Face of God" in Matt. 18:10,
Clement is familiar with the idea that "the whole world of creatures... revolves
in sevens" and that "the first-born princes of the angels (πρωτόγονοι αγγέλων
άρχοντες), who have the greatest power, are seven." 48 He can easily furnish
another series of exegetical assimilation: the "angels of the little ones" in
Matt. 18:10 are the "thrones" of Col. 1:16, and "the seven eyes of the Lord"
of Zech. 3:9; 4:10, and Rev. 5:6. 49 All of these passages become, for Clem­
ent, descriptions of the seven πρωτόκτιστοι, celestial beings "first created."
Of these highest he says the following:
Among the seven, there has not been given more to the one and less to the other; nor is
T
any of them lacking in advancement (προκοπή); [they] ha\ e received perfection from
the beginning, at the first [moment of their] coming into being, from God through the
0
Son;... their liturgy is common and undivided/
There can be no doubt that Clement echoes Second Temple Jewish angelo-
logical speculations, 51 and that among its direct predecessors one should
count not only the Marcosian "seven powers praising the Logos" (discussed
above), 52 but also the "first created ones" (πρώτοι κτιοθέντες) in the Shep­
herd of Hermas? 0 and the seven spirits of Revelation. 54
The seven protoctists, however, also carry a definite Pneumatological con­
tent, since Clement identifies them not only with various types of angels, but
also with the "seven spirits resting on the rod that springs from the root of
5
Jesse" (Isa. 11:1-3, LXX) and "the heptad of the Spirit."^ Fortunately, schol­
arship on Clement of Alexandria has already discussed the Alexandrian s
so-called "angel Pneumatology," or, more recently, "angelomorphic Pneu­
D6
matology," allowing the present writer not to enter into further details.
To conclude this section, it appears that, in Clement's interpretation of
Matt. 18:10, "the face of God" is a Christological title, while the angels
contemplating the Face occupy a theological area of confluence of angelo-
logy and Pneumatology. On this latter point—Matt. 18:10 as a proof-text
for Pneumatology—Clement's exegesis finds a surprising confirmation in
the writings of the famous early Syriac author Aphrahat.
Among Syriac writers, I will only refer to Aphrahat "the Persian Sage." 5
There are good reasons for such a limitation. First, Windrid Cramer's study
of the use of Matt. 18:10 in early Syriac literature has already provided a
comprehensive survey of relevant texts and authors. Even though my own
interpretation of Aphrahat diverges from Cramers, there is no point in
D8
duplicating the presentation of primary sources. Second, my interest for
this essay lies mainly in highlighting the patristic use of Matt. 18:10 in the
service of Christology and Pneumatology. Finally, and most importantly,
Aphrahat s Demonstrations, although written during the second quarter of
the fourth century, are, by virtue of their noted "archaism" or "traditional­
ism," a unique treasure trove of older exegetical and doctrinal traditions.
Indeed, unlike his younger contemporary Ephrem of Nisibe, Aphrahat
can be described as "entirely traditional, that is, he transmits the teaching
that he received, lays out testimonia pertaining to each topic, in order to
convince or reassure a reader whose intelligence functions according to this
9
logic of faith."^ He represents "an unicum in the history of Christian dogma",
because his "singularly archaic" Christology is "independent of Nicaea and...
of the development of Greco-Roman Christology." 60 Most important for
my argument is the fact that "there is next to nothing in his writings to
suggest that he had much of any contact at all with... the earlier writings
of the Greek Church Fathers." 61
The following quotes are drawn from Aphrahat s first and sixth Demon­
strations:
And whatever man there is that receives the Spirit from the water (of baptism) and
grieves it, it departs from him until he dies, and returns according to its nature to
Christ, and accuses that man of having grieved i t . . . This is the Spirit, my beloved, that
the Prophets received, and thus also have we received. And it is not at every time found
with those that receive it, but sometimes it returns to Him that sent it, and sometimes
it goes to him that receives it. Hearken to that which our Lord said, Despise not one
of these little ones that believe on Me, for their angels in heaven do always behold the
face of My Father. This Spirit then goes frequently and stands before God and beholds
His face, and whosoever injures the temple in which it dwells, it will accuse him before
God. 6 2
And definitely did He show concerning this stone: Loi on this stone will I open seven eyes
(Zech. 3:9). And what then are the seven eyes that were opened on the stone? Clearly
the Spirit of God that abode on Christ with seven operations, as Isaiah the Prophet
said, The Spirit of God shall rest and dwell upon Him, (a spirit) of wisdom and under­
standing, of counsel and of courage, ojknowledge andojthe fear ojthe Lord(Isa. 11:2-3).
These were the seven eyes that were opened upon the Stone, and these are the seven eyes
of the Lord which look upon all the earth (Zech. 4:10). 6 3
Aphrahat argues here one of the axioms of his ascetic theory: the Holy Spirit
departs from a sinful person, and goes to accuse that person before the throne
of God. It is quite striking that the work of the Holy Spirit is presented in
unmistakably angelic imagery (the Spirit "goes frequently," stands before
the divine throne, and beholds the Face of God) and supported by recourse
to Matt. 18:10. If the two passages from the Demonstrations are combined—
and it is certainly legitimate to do so, given the common theme (the Holy
Spirit), and the formal structure (evidence from the Scriptures for the activ­
ity 7 of the Spirit)—it becomes apparent that Aphrahat uses the same cluster
of Biblical verses that we encountered earlier in Clement: "the seven eyes
of the Lord" (Zech. 3:9; 4:10); "the seven gifts of the Spirit" (Isa. 11:2-3);
the "angels of the face" (Matt. 18:10). I submit, therefore, that, just as in
the case of Clement, we have here an echo of the tradition about the high­
est angelic company, combined with a definite Pneumatological content.
Yet, the use of Matt. 18:10 as a Pneumatological proof-text does not
mean that Aphrahat himself consciously and actively promoted an angelo­
morphic Pneumatology. It should be noted that this is neither the only
way in which Aphrahat interprets Matt. 18:10, 64 nor the only image he
uses for the Holy Spirit. 6 ^ Moreover, it is quite obvious, from the way he
writes, that Aphrahat does not see himself as proposing anything new or
unusual. He is most likely transmitting an older tradition. 66
It is certain, however, that no direct literary connection exists between
Aphrahat and Clement of Alexandria. 6- If one were to speculate about a
common source for the cluster of Biblical passages and Pneumatological
exegesis of Matt. 18:10 that occurs in both authors, a possible candidate
would be the source(s) used by Ps.-Clem. Horn. 17. 68
In conclusion, the angelomorphic Pneumatology detected in the writings
of Clement and Aphrahat represents an echo of older tradition, which in
their time were still acceptable. A few decades after the Persian Sage's Dem­
onstrations, the Pneumatomachian crisis will impose a different treatment
of Matt. 18:10.
The angelomorphic Pneumatology illustrated by Clement and Aphrahat,
as well as the use of Matt. 18:10 to support it, became the subject of severe
polemics during the debates on the divinity of the Holy Spirit that fol­
lowed the Arian controversy. Here are two excerpts from Gregory of Nyssa
and Basil of Caesarea, summarizing much of the arguments in play:
w h o . . . would not agree, that every intellectual nature is governed by the ordering of
the Holy Spirit? For since it is said the angels do always behold the Face of My Father
which is in heaven (Matt. 18:10) and it is not possible to behold the person (ύπόστασιν)
of the Father otherwise than by fixing the sight upon it through His image (δια του
χαράκτη ρος); but the image (χαράκτη ρ) of the person (υποστάσεως) of the Father is
the Only-begotten, and to Him again no man can draw near whose mind has not been
illumined by the Holy Spirit, what else is shown from this but that the Holy Spirit is not
separated from any operation which is wrought (ενεργείας ενεργούμενης) by the Father
and the Son? Thus the identity of operation (ενεργείας) in Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
shows plainly the undistinguishable character of their substance (φύσεως). 69
The pure, intelligent, and super-mundane powers (ΰπερκόσμιοι δυνάμεις) are and are
styled holy, because they have their holiness of the grace given by the Holy Spirit
The powers of the heavens are not holy by nature; were it so there would in this respect
be no difference between them and the Holy Spirit
And how could "thrones,
dominions, principalities and powers" live their blessed life, did they not "behold the
face of the Father which is in heaven" [Matt. 18:10]? But to behold it is impossible
without the Spirit!... in the order of the intellectual world it is impossible for the high
life of Law to abide without the Spirit. For it so to abide were as likely as that an army
should maintain its discipline in the absence of its commander, or a chorus its har­
mony without the guidance of the choirmaster (του κορυφαίου μη συναρμόζοντος)
Thus with those beings who are not gradually perfected by advancement (ουκ εκ
προκοπής τελειουμένοις) but are perfect from the moment of the creation (άπ" αυτής
τής κτίσεως ευθύς τελείοις), there is in creation the presence of the Holy Spirit, who
confers on them the grace that flows from Him for the completion and perfection of
their essence." 0
Gregory of Nyssa explains that the Face of God referred to in Matt. 18:10
is none other than the Son, because πρόσωπον in Matt. 18:10 is the same
as χαρακτήρ in Heb. 1:3. Even though Matthew does not state it explicitly,
the angels do not have direct access to the Face: they are rather enabled to
see, being guided, and illumined by the Holy Spirit. In fact, for Gregory,
this is what reveals the "identity of operation" between Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, from which one is bound to infer the identity of substance. 1
Basil mentions the "supermundane powers," angelic beings that "are not
gradually perfected by increase and advance, but are perfect from the
moment of the creation," only to insist that the Spirit is to the angels as an
army commander to his troops, or a choirmaster to a choir.
At first sight, the use of Matt. 18:10 in an apology for the divinity of
the Spirit seems peculiar—especially since elsewhere (Adv. Eun. 3.1) Basil
also uses the verse to support the teaching about guardian angels. In light
of earlier uses of Matt. 18:10, however, such as those echoed by Clement
and Aphrahat, it can be conjectured that the verse carried some weight in
the Pneumatomachian argument. It is noteworthy that Basil still accepts
the identification of the angels in Matt. 18:10 with the "thrones, domin­
ions, principalities and powers" of Col. 1:16, while Gregory still equates
πρόσωπον (Matt. 18:10) with χαρακτήρ (Heb. 1:3). Basil's description of
the Spirit as a "choirmaster" who ensures the order and harmony of the
celestial liturgy also has unmistakable angelic overtones, stemming perhaps
from the "high angelology" of the opponents. 2 Moreover, Basils reference
to "those beings who are not gradually perfected by increase and advance,
but are perfect from the-moment of the creation," seems a clear enough
evocation of the protoctists about whom Clement had said that they are not
lacking in advancement (προκοπή), but have received perfection from the
3
beginning, at the first [moment of their] creation.
It seems, then, that just as Arianism was articulating an archaic doctrine
of Christos Angelos, so also were the Pneumatomachians using a theology of
the Holy Spirit that may be traced back to angelological speculations in
4
Second Temple Judaism. Even while they offer one of the last echoes of
the Face Christology, the passages from Basil and Nyssen illustrate the
demise of angelomorphic Pneumatotology.
In the foregoing pages, I have discussed the ways in which Matt. 18:10 was
read by Valentinian groups, by Jewish Christians, and by representatives of
the so-called Great Church, before and after the Arian and Pneumatom-
achian crises. These analyses have led to the conclusion that the Wirkungs­
geschichte of Matt. 18:10 presents a more complex picture than so far
acknowledged by Biblical and Patristic scholarship.
It is certainly true that this verse "became a locus classicus of-Christian
angelology." D More needs to be said, however. Various early Christian
exegetes have chosen to emphasize one or several of the imagistic compo­
nents of the verse (God; the Face of God; the angels; their act of interces­
sion; the little ones; the relation between the angels and the little ones),
using Matt. 18:10 as scriptural proof for the doctrinal phenomena that I
have called "Face Christology" and "angelomorphic Pneumatology."
A notable common element bridging temporal, geographical and eccle­
siastical boundaries is the Christological interpretation of the "face of God"
in Matt. 18:10. Almost equally widespread is the identification of the
angels in Matt. 18:10 with the seven supreme celestial entities, which is
carried out via exegetical identification with Isaiahs "seven gifts of the
Spirit" and Zechariah's "seven eyes of the Lord." Less common, though
strongly represented by Clement of Alexandria and Aphrahat, is the use of
Matt. 18:10 to illustrate the intercessory work of the Holy Spirit.
Just as "Name" Christology, "Wisdom" Christology, or "Glory" Christol­
ogy, once crucial categories in the age of Jewish Christianity, gave way to a
more precise vocabulary shaped by the new environment of the Church
and the Christological controversies of the third and fourth centuries, so
also was "Face" Christology destined not to become a major player in clas­
sic definitions of faith. No major disturbances are recorded in this regard;
the term was never formally rejected, it simply went out of fashion.
With advent of the new theological paradigm in the wake of the Arian
and Pneumatomachian confrontations, the Koly Spirit in angelic disguise
and the associated use of K4att. 18:10, became highly problematic, and
ultimately a theological liability. The exegesis of Matt. 18:10 illustrated by
Clement and Aphrahat was rejected. Echoes of a polemical counter-exegesis
can be discerned in the curious referencing of Matt. 18:10, a text normally
useless for Pneumatology, in the polemical writings advocating the divinity
of the Spirit.
Finally, the texts discussed in this paper understand the "little ones" as a
designating "the elect"—whether Marcus' initiates, Clements "true Gnos­
tics" or Aphrahat s "sons of the covenant." This coheres well with Joachim
Jeremías' hypothesis, mentioned earlier, about the early usage of μικροί in
Matthew's community.
In a larger religio-historical perspective, the use of apocalyptic themes
such as the divine "Face" and the "angels of the Face" as building blocks for
an emerging Christian doctrine of Christ and the Holy Spirit illustrates a
larger phenomenon, namely the indebtedness of pre-Nicene theology (and,
by reaction, even of later Christian thought) to the categories inherited
from Jewish apocalyptic literature.