In the NT, Romans 6-8 has usually been regarded as a locus classicus of Pau­
line teaching on sanctification, although the apostle himself did not intend
to deal with the topic of'holiness' in these chapters. 1 The understanding of
Romans 7 in particular, doubtless one of the hardest sections in the epistle,
has played an important role here. However, now as before, exceedingly
controversial discussions show that there is still far from any consensus. 2
This present essay deliberately avoids presenting and evaluating differ­
ent interpretative options as well as entering into an intensive discussion
with the secondary literature, for such a comprehensive examination of
diverse positions and evaluations in a process of detailed exegesis would
certainly go beyond the scope of an article. What will be set forth in the
following is my critical response to a specific interpretation model that
reads Rom. 7:14-25 and 8:1-17 together solely in terms of Paul's own
Christian experience characterized by the eschatological tension of 'already-
not yet'. According to James D.G. Dunn, a strong advocate of this model,
the radical inner conflict of the person Τ (εγώ) in 7:14-25 indicates a
"continuing state of dividedness... between mind and flesh" in a mature
Christian believer, 3 just as the 'Spirit-flesh' antithesis of 8:1-13 implies also
an "ongoing warfare in the life of the believer between flesh and Spirit"
which is explicitly represented in Gal. 5:16-17. 4
Admitting that this interpretation might unfortunately be "much more
in tune with personal and social reality" in our times, it surely does not,
however, provide "a much sounder theological base for pastoral counseling". 5
For its adverse effect becomes disastrous, whenever sincere believers take some
comfort in believing that Paul was their companion in the desperate struggle
against sin and too simply resign themselves to the struggle. If Rom. 7:14-25
describes what the Christian life 'must be like', there is no other choice in our
daily life than to succumb to defeatism without any prospect that our spir­
itual weather chart will turn out to be brighter some day. In this view, it causes
concern that this interpretation is winning more and more popularity. 6
In order to reconsider Rom. 7:7-25 with special reference to this 'escha-
tological tension' oriented reading, I will firstly outline Dunn's interpreta­
tion according to his major assertions and supporting arguments; secondly,
set forth my own exegetical observations, arguing for and against Dunn's
view; and finally, on the basis of all these, make some concluding remarks
on the practical application of the text for our Christian life.
As to the function of Rom. 7, Dunn shares with many recent interpreters the
view that this chapter is intended to "serve as a defence of the [Mosaic] law"
(i.e., to clarify that "the real blame for human enslavement to sin and death
lies with sin itself", not with the law). He also shares the idea that the iden­
tity of the Τ (εγώ, w. 7-25) is merely secondary to this central issue. With
regard to its structure, however, Dunn discards the widely accepted analy­
sis he previously adopted in his commentary that Rom. 7:7-25 is an elabo­
ration of 7:5 and 8:1-17 that of 7:6, 8 in order to strengthen his fundamental
idea that in Rom. 6-8 Paul consistently deals with the Christian condition. 9
Dunn maintains that in these chapters the apostle "looks in turn at the
Christian in relation to [four] key realities of his experience": sin (Rom. 6),
sin and the law (Rom. 7), the law, flesh, and the Spirit (Rom. 8:l-27). 10
Underlying this structure analysis is Dunn's conviction that the "eschato-
logical tension" 11 runs through all the Pauline soteriology: The most charac­
teristic feature of Christian experience, for Paul, is the tension between
realization and consummation; believers live in the overlap of the present
age and the age to come, where the final saving work of God has already
begun in them but is not yet completed; as a result, numerous soteriologi-
cal metaphors used by Paul exhibit the two-sidedness of his eschatological
consciousness. 12 Thus Dunn sees in Rom. 6-8 a "dialectical structure" in
which the apostle brings out the reality and seriousness of the 'already and
not yet'. 13 Here "Paul makes an in-principle statement in clear-cut unequiv­
ocal terms at the start of each chapter, only to go on immediately to qualify
it and to blur the clean-cut lines by showing that the reality of the believer s
experience is more ambivalent". 14 In other words, "in-principle statements"
of "Already" in the "indicative" (6:1-11, with reference to sin; 7:1-6, with
reference to law; 8:1-9, with reference to flesh/mortal body) are directly fol­
lowed and qualified by the "Not yet" statements about the "reality of escha­
tological tension" in the "imperative" (6:12-23, with reference to sin; 7:7-25,
with reference to law; 8:10-30, with reference to flesh/mortal body). 15
Integrated into this overarching structure, Rom. 7 is taken to mean that
Paul, having emphasized the decisiveness of the 'already' (w. 4-6), thinks
it necessary also to acknowledge the seriousness of the 'not yet' (w. l4-25b).
Notwithstanding the certainty of the beginning of salvation, there was still
an unavoidable and marked continuity with what had gone before. This
best explains, for Dunn, the definite transition from the past tenses of
w. 7-13 to the present in w. l4-24a and the continuation of the present
tense into v. 25b. Since the present age is characterized as being under the
power of sin and death, this power continues to be its character as long as
it endures. Even Christians who still are part of the present evil age are still
caught in the nexus of sin and death. In this way of giving more emphasis
to the seriousness of the 'not yet', Dunn believed he was faithful to the
16
Pauline "realistic anthropology" in Rom. 7.
Dunn paid special attention to the section of 7:14-25. Especially he
considers the parallel between w. 18-20 and w. 21-23 as a clue to Paul's
line of thought. r According to Dunn, the apostle begins with a statement
that reflects the complexity of the situation, distancing both the law and
the Τ from the real culprit, sin (w. 14-17). Then he breaks down the state­
ment into a more careful description, first of the "divided T " (w. 18-20)
and then of the "divided law" (w. 21-23). The Τ is divided: it is the Τ
which wants to do good and to avoid doing evil, but it is the same Τ which
fails to do the good and commits the evil (w. 18-19). The culprit is sin: it
enslaves the fleshly Τ and thus prevents the willing Τ from achieving what
it wills (v. 20). Correlated with the divided Τ is the divided law. The will­
ing 'Γ, the inner person, the Τ as mind, approves the law as the law of God
(w. 21-22). But the law used by sin (as indicated in w. 7-13) 18 takes over
the fleshly T , the "constituent parts" of the T ; 1 9 and the powerful combi­
nation of sin, law, and flesh ensures the failure of the willing Τ (v. 23).
None of this, insists Dunn, reads like the description of a state or experi­
ence which is now wholly past for the writer. Rather, the existential anguish
of w. 14-25 sounds like an experience Paul knew very well.
Moreover, it is hard for Dunn to believe that the conclusion of v. 25b
("So then I myself with my mind serve the law of God, and with my flesh
the law of sin") depicts a state wholly past for believers. Its appearance at
this point is quite astonishing and confusing for it comes after the shout of
triumph (v. 25a, "But thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord!")
as the solution to the frustration expressed in the anguished cry of v. 24
("Wretched man that I am!—who will deliver me from this body of
death?"). 20 Besides, the present tense of v. 25b seems to indicate an ongoing
state—"with my mind I go on serving the law of God, and with my flesh
[I go on serving] the law of sin." It is precisely the one who knows that
Jesus Christ provides the answer who goes on to observe calmly that the Τ
continues to be divided between mind and flesh. As the conclusion to
w. 7-25, v. 25b can hardly be read more naturally than as indicating a
continuing state—a state of continuing dividedness of the Τ who thanks
God through Jesus Christ. In short, "if 7.24 is the believer's life-long cry of
frustration, 7.25a is his thanksgiving of eschatological hope, and 7.25b his
calm realism for the present in the light of both." 2 1
Dunn illustrates this 'eschatological tension for every believer as follows: 22
The point is that "the believer has not been removed from the realm of the
flesh; the believer is still fleshly. However the same believer also, with the
mind and in the inner person, desires to do the will of God. There is a
warfare here, and the Τ in the realm of flesh is still enslaved under sin's
enticing power (7.14), still caught as a prisoner in the nexus of the sin-
abused law (7.23). The Τ is still not delivered from this body of death
(7.24), that is, has still to experience the resurrection of the body, the com­
pletion of the triumph of life over death, the full participation in Christ's
resurrection." 23
The same tension is, Dunn sets, fully delineated from another facet in
the 'Spirit'-'flesh' (πνεΰμα-σάρξ) antithesis of Rom. 8. For this indicates
that the gift of the Spirit does not bring to an end a previous anthropo­
24
logical tension, but begins the eschatological tension. Rom. 8:2-9 does
not portray a contrast between two kinds of people (non-believers in the
flesh vs. believers in the Spirit), but just "ideal types" of people; in reality,
human beings partake in different measures of the two types. The implied
exhortation is that the readers should seek to align themselves as much as
possible with the Spirit, as explicitly articulated in Gal. 5-6 (cf. Rom. 8:4
par. Gal. 5:16; Rom. 8:5 par. Gal. 5:25; Rom. 8:6 par. Gal. 6:8). 25
Rom. 8:10-14 does not allow us to read the contrast of Rom. 8:4-6 as a
description of a wholly realized transition: 1) V. 10b declares to believers the
reality of the continuing eschatological tension: "the body is dead because of
sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness." This body is identical with
"the body of this death" (7:24) as well as with "the body of sin" (6:6).
If so, the aorist of 6:3-6 and 7:4-6 is not to be taken as events finished and
complete. Nor can 7:14-25 be regarded as describing experiences wholly past
for believers. Sin and death continue to be all too effective realities working
in and through their body. 26 2) V. 11 makes clear why: because deliverance
from the body of sin and death will only happen at the resurrection of the
body. Though the Spirit ensures life, death has not yet been conquered.
In eschatological terms, this is a case of both-and in terms of both life and
death (v. 10) until God completes the salvation process by "giving life
to their mortal bodies" (v. I I ) . 2 3) Paul's advice in v. 12 ("we are under no
obligation to live in accordance with the flesh") and his warning of v. 13
("If you are living according to the flesh, you must die") become meaning­
less, if the Spirit-flesh antithesis were a thing of the past for the believer.
These verses imply that the Spirit persons are still in danger of succumb­
ing to the flesh, to its weakness and desires. They are not yet the ideal
Spirit people, not yet having the realized eschatological hope of resurrected
bodies. 28
Therefore, Dunn insists that Rom. 7 and 8 have to be taken together,
7:14-25 and 8:1-9 as representing the two ends of the eschatological ten­
sion: At one end, the fleshly Τ whose continuing bondage to sin and death
is ever in danger of capturing the whole 'Γ. At the other, the Spirit as fruc­
tifying life ever threatened by death's continued hold, but ever working to
transform the willing believer towards the end of resurrection and whole
salvation. An ongoing warfare in the life of the believer between flesh and
Spirit is explicit in Gal. 5:16-17: "Walk by the Spirit, and you will not
carry out the desire of the flesh. For the flesh sets its desire against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for these are in opposition to one
another, so that you may not do the things that you please." Here Paul
indicates that flesh and Spirit constitute two dimensions of the believer's
present existence, which make for its state of tension. The believer is involved
on both sides of the cosmic struggle. In terms of Rom. 7-8, Τ as flesh am
at odds with Ύ whose life is the Spirit. Τ am at odds with myself. The
29
warfare is between Τ in Adam and Τ in Christ.
As shown above, Dunn's interpretation of Rom. 7 is primarily steered by
his assumption that the eschatological 'already-not yet' tension molded the
whole process of Pauline soteriology. There is no question at all of the need
to highlight the importance of 'salvation history for Paul that which is
customarily called the "already but not yet" dimension of his theology.
Most investigators agree that the apostle adopted the Jewish apocalyptic
idea of two ages but radically modified its temporal dualism by viewing the
Christ-event as the center or climax of history. Actually the expression
"eschatological tension" with its supplementing phrase "already but not
yet" has become one of the most favorite technical terms used among bib­
lical scholars today for designating the Pauline perspective on the develop­
ment of God's redemptive work through Jesus Christ in history. 30
Yet Dunn's idea underlying that common expression seems to be quite
different from other, at least evangelical, theologians. For in many places,
where he speaks of the eschatological tension in the Pauline indicatives and
imperatives, the impression is hardly avoidable that he grasps that tension
in a "dialectical structure" to the effect that many soteriological themes of
the apostle are interpreted in terms oí both already and not yet "at the same
time .
The problem of applying such a dialectic scheme to Rom. 6-8 is obvious, for
it disturbs the magnificent train of thought in Rom. 6-8 by muddling Paul's
lucid statements about the believer's status past and present. Dunn argues that
the apostle begins each chapter of Rom. 6-8 with strong indicative sentences
"in clear-cut unequivocal terms" pronouncing his receivers to be in princi-
ple "freed" from sin, the law, and the flesh but directly continues to "qualify"
and "blur" the clean-cut statements with imperatives and warnings that show
their states and conditions to be in reality not so simple but "ambivalent". 32
According to this view, Paul's argumentation does not move straightfor-
wardly, but c to and fro' or c up and down between 'already-not yet' (i.e.,
positive-negative): 'Having died to sin in union with Christ, you are now
already set free from sin.' (6:1-11)—'But you must know that this freedom
cannot simply be yours in reality yet' (6:12-23); 'Having died to the law
through the body of Christ, you are now already released from the law and
so able to serve God in newness of the Spirit.' (7:1-6)—'But you have to
recognize that you cannot simply enjoy this deliverance in reality yet' (7:7-
25); 'Having been indwelt by the Spirit, you are now already able to fulfill
the requirement of the law by rejecting the flesh' (8:1-9)—'But this ability,
as you will experience, cannot directly be yours in reality yet' (8:10-30).
This alternating view seems to be improbable in light of the straightfor-
ward line of thought in Rom. 6-8 as well as the language used there. These
chapters belong to the second major section of the letter (5:1-8:39), the
overarching theme of which is the believer's "assurance of future glory" or
"certainty of salvation" (5:1-11; 8:18-39). 33 Therefore, in Rom. 6:1-8:17
Paul elucidates the believer's freedom from the tyranny of sin (6:1-23),
from that of the law (7:1-25), and the liberating work of the Spirit (8:1-17),
in order to substantiate this assurance/certainty. Hence his arguments here
stringently proceeds from one section to another in a straight course, his
tone sounding positive and decisive more so than anywhere else.
Besides, the division of indicative and imperative in Rom. 6-8 does not
fit closely into Dunn's scheme. In the twelve verses of 6:12-23, where,
according to Dunn, chiefly imperatives or warnings are supposed to blur
the clear-cut indicatives of w. 1-11, barely four verses appear in the imper­
ative (w. 12, 13, 19c) or as a quasi warning (v. 16). However the remaining
eight are unequivocal, indicative statements (w. 14, 15, 17-18, 20, 21-22,
23), five of them even contrast the Once' and 'now' of believers very vividly
(w. 17-18, 20, 21-22). The whole of chapter 7 does not match to Dunn's
dualism for it contains no imperative, nor warning at all. It just purely
indicatively describes first the relationship between believers and the law as
regards their Once' and 'now' (w. 1-6), and then the impotence of the
good law that is consistently abused by the wicked sin dwelling in man
(w. 7-25). Even though Rom. 8 contains only a single imperative sentence
(v. 25) and the rest of the thirty-eight verses are in the indicative, the
'already-not yet' tension here is maybe more striking than in any other
chapter. For the indwelling of the Spirit that is clearly stated as realized
(w. 1-9, 14-16), its promised outcomes, i.e., the liberation from the law of
sin and death (v. 2), the deliverance from the flesh (v. 9), and the sonship
of God (w. 14-16) seems to be, however, still invalid (w. 10-13, 23).
Furthermore, the language Paul uses to describe the believer's past and
present status in Rom. 6-8 does not permit any kind of dialectic reading.
Whenever the apostle proclaims that the Roman Christians (often includ­
ing himself via "we"-style) have undergone dramatic changes in their con­
dition, there is normally a [at least implied] contrast between what they
were and what they are: "You/We were once
, but now...." This antith­
esis is deeply rooted in the Pauline conception of salvation history; accord­
ing to this, history is divided into two 'aeons,' or 'regimes,' each with its own
founder Adam and Christ, respectively and each with its own ruling pow­
ers sin, the law, flesh, and death on the one hand; and righteousness, grace,
the Spirit, and life on the other. Frequently with the emphatic νυν! δέ/νΰν
("[but] now"), 34 Paul portrays the different states or conditions of believers
in term of 'before' and 'now', 'outside-' and 'in-Christ', 'died' and 'alive',
'enslaved' and 'liberated', etc., as presented in the following table (Table 1):
Each of these expressions depicts an objective status. Paul is not speaking
hypothetically. The antithetical language employed here is, semantically
speaking, transierential. Behind the contrasts lies a "two-regime" frame­
work: "Paul pictures the believer as one who has been transferred from the
one regime to the other," who has been "placed in a new situation, domi­
nated by a new set of powers." 3 ^ Therefore it is quite difficult to see how all
these contrasts "can be applied to the same person in the same spiritual
condition without doing violence to Paul's language." 36 Of course, Paul
believes that new persons in Christ can make the mistake of acting like old
persons outside Christ, hence the warnings added. Nonetheless, the antith­
eses between what they were and what they are should not be underplayed.
Dunn's language that combines these antitheses in terms of "both and" as
well as "at the same time" is much closer to the modern "dialectical theol­
ogy" 3 rather than to the Pauline thought.
In Rom. 6 and 8, respectively, Paul makes it clear that "being free from
under sin" and "being free from the law of sin and death" are conditions
that are true for every Christian. If one is a Christian, then these things are
true; if one is not, they are not true. This means that the situation of Τ
depicted in Rom. 7:14-25 cannot be that of the 'normal' Christians, nor of
an immature Christian. Nor can it describe the condition of any Christian
living by the law because the Christian who is mistakenly living according
to the law is yet a Christian and is therefore not "under sin" or a "prisoner
of the law of sin."
Despite the unceasing vigorous debates on Rom. 7 it is generally agreed
58
that its main topic is νόμος, the Mosaic Law. This topic is probably the
most sensitive and delicate of the issues with which Paul has to deal in the
letter, 39 because the criticisms of his Jewish Christian opponents essentially
center on and derive from his preaching about this subject. In order to gain
the hearts of the Roman Christians for his mission to Spain, the apostle
must convince them that his view of the Mosaic Law is orthodox and the
criticisms of his opponents are unfounded. 40 Therefore Paul in Rom. 7, hark­
ing back to his occasional negative statements about the Mosaic Law (e.g.,
3:19-20, 27-28; 4:13-15; 5:13, 20), 41 defends the divine nature of the law as
well as exposes its functional deficiency with regard to human salvation.
The most natural way of paragraphing Rom. 7 is to see w. 1-6 as the
principal section that contains the main point Paul wants to make in this
chapter and then to divide the rest of the text according to the rhetorical
questions he asks in w. 7 and 13 (w. 1-6, w. 7-12, w. 13-25). The first
section (w. 1-6) begins with a general principle, which the argument of
the section is based on: death severs one's bondage to the law (v. 1). Vv. 2-3
illustrate that principle from the marriage where the death of a spouse sets
the other spouse "free from" the law that brands a second marriage as adul­
terous. This general principle is applied to Christian experience in v. 4,
which is the key verse in the section: Christians, in dying with Christ, have
suffered a death that severs their bondage to the law and that makes pos­
sible their new relationship with Jesus Christ. Then, in w. 5-6, Paul shows
the need for, and results of, this "transfer of masters" by contrasting the
situation of people έν τη σαρκί, in whose case the law aids and abets sin,
with the situation of people who are released from the law and serve έν
καινότητι πνεύματος.
Rom. 7:7-25 explicates the theme of v. 5 that "desires for sins" were
stimulated "through the law" and "at work in our members to bear fruit for
death". 42 The argument develops in a pair of diatribe-styles (question,
emphatic rejection [μη γένοιτο], explanation) which are used in various
ways in Romans; in this case, however, mark the whole section as some­
thing of an excursus. For the main line of development proceeds from
7:6b—"serving in newness of the Spirit"—to-Rom. 8:1-17, with its focus
on the Spirit in the new age. 43 It is because the theme of the Mosaic Law is
for Paul's exposition of his gospel an extremely touchy and important issue
and because his purpose of writing the letter stands and falls with this argu­
mentation that he gives such an amount of space to it in Rom. 7:7-25. 44
Thus, in the second section (w. 7-12), Paul asks whether the law itself is
sinful (v. 7aa) and then answers this question. Having emphatically rejected
such a notion (v. 7aß), he begins to narrate, in the first person singular and
in the past tense, a typical experience of the man who is confronted with
the law. 45 This person Τ shows how the law is used by sin to produce more
sin and thereby bring death. Indeed, the law, as a bridgehead, gives occa­
sion to sin but is not the cause of sin. Because it is holy, righteous, and
good, the law caused evil desire in man. Sin springs to life after the com­
mandment is enunciated. Therefore, the man, confronted with the law,
dies by transgressing God's command, but the commandment is not itself
sinful. The blame is put on sin, the real culprit.
In the third section (w. 13-25), Paul inquires whether the law is the
cause of death (v. 13 a) and answers this question in a way similar to his
former response. Here the apostle describes Τ as a 'fleshly person' in the
present tense whose own weakness and internal division allows sin to gain
the mastery, despite the goodness of the law. The hew per se is not responsible
for death, but sin uses the law as an ally to bring about death. The nefarious
character of sin illustrates its ability to turn a good thing, the law, into an
evil purpose. The law itself provides no power for obedience, and thus those
who are in the flesh cannot do what it demands, even if they long to do so.
They are captives to the power of sin and are in misery under its dominion.
Triumph over sin is actualized not via the law but through Jesus Christ.
For understanding Rom. 7, therefore, it is crucial to see v. 4 as a key verse
containing the main points of the chapter, w. 5-6 as a principle statement
about the believer's 'past' and 'present' status 'before' and 'in Christ (v. 5a,
δτε... ήμεν έν τη σαρκί; ν. 6, νυνί δ έ . . . δουλεύειν ήμας έν καινότητι
πνεύματος), and w. 7-25 as an explication of v. 5. 46 Dunn rightly observes
that Rom. 7:1-6 "gathers up the main thrust of chapter 6"; 4 indeed, the
former repeats with respect to the 'law' many of the same points that were
made in the latter with respect to 'sin'. 48 Nevertheless, he, having leveled the
distinct shifts of the believer's condition in Rom. 6-8 and slighted the rhe­
torical character of 7:7-25 as a discourse focusing on the Mosaic Law, unduly
connects 7:14-25 with 8:1-17 as descriptive of normal Christian experi­
ence. The reason why he interprets like this is, as already mentioned above,
twofold: First, the change of tenses in 7:7-25 (w. 7-13, past; w. 14-25,
present); second, the awkward conclusion of v. 25b that exhibits the con­
tinuing dividedness of Τ ("So then, I myself with the mind serve the law
of God, but with the flesh the law of sin") even after the shout of thanks­
giving in v. 25a ("But thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord!"). 49
However, firstly, within the rhetorical framework of Rom. 7:7-25 the
change of tenses is of no temporal significance but just represents a stylistic
device for enhancing the realistic effect. This becomes apparent in the fact
that what is compactly expressed in the past tense in v. 5 ("when we were
in the flesh, the sinful passions which were [aroused] by the law, were at
work in our members, to bear fruit that leads to death"), is exactly repre­
sented at length in the present tense in w. l4-24a, 25b. Secondly, v. 25a is
not strictly an essential part of what Paul argues, but must be recognized
as an interjection, a strong and sudden emotion of gratitude, exclaiming
anticipatorily over the victory believers have in Christ (cf. ούν, 8: l). 5 0 Then
v. 25b (see άρα ούν
) is a summarizing recapitulation of the dividedness
of the Τ that has been portrayed in w. 15-23. 51
Consequently, the person 'Γ (εγώ) of Rom. 7:7-25 is not to be spotlighted
as the 'central figure' in Rom. 7. Paul is neither concerned to describe an
inner conflict of human existence from a psycho-anthropological angle,
nor to demonstrate an inevitable spiritual frustration of the Christian
believer on his way to sanctification. 52 The Τ is, rather, to be reckoned as
a performer Paul called out to the stage, allotting a role to realistically and
impressively convey what the apostle aims to clarify in Rom. 7, i.e., the
intrinsic goodness as well as the practical impotence of the Mosaic Law.
In line with this purpose, the Τ describes himself as a man who con­
fesses that the law is holy, righteous, good, and spiritual (w. 12, 14a),
delights in it according to his inner person (v. 22), wishes and tries to
observe it (w. 15-21), and even serves it as the law of God with his mind
(v. 25b). Such a man can be properly categorized into the regenerated
believer (cf. Rom. 8:7; 2 Cor. 4:16; Eph. 3:16). This man Τ shows, how­
ever, at the same time, certain evidences leading to the judgment that he
cannot be a regenerated Christian in Pauline definition.
Paul's definite statements about the Christian believer in Rom. 6 and 8
are diametrically opposedto the miserable situation of Τ depicted in 7:7-25.
Rom. 8 proclaims that there is "no condemnation" for those who are in
Christ (v. 1) because they have been "liberated from the law of sin and
death" by the "law of the Spirit of life" (v. 2). They are able to "fulfill the
[righteous] requirement of the law according to the Spirit" (v. 4); they are
said to be no longer "in the flesh" but "in the Spirit" (v. 9). Likewise, Rom. 6
gives a description that the believers in Christ are "set free from sin" (w. 18,
22) and thus no more "slaves of sin" (w. 17, 20) but "enslaved to the right-
eousness" (v. 18) or "to God" (v. 22).
On the contrary, Rom. 7:7-25 portray the Τ as being "fleshly" and "sold
under the sin [as slave]" D3 (V. 14), as a person who wishes to keep the law but
cannot help but continuing in sin against his will (w. 15-20) and thus "impris­
oned by the law of sin" (v. 23), "serves the law of sin" (v. 25). In a word, the Τ
is a man "under the law" (6:14,15; cf. 7:7-8), a "slave of sin" (6:17,20; cf. 7:14,
23) who is incessantly "condemned" to "death" (5:16-18; cf. 7:9-13, 24).
The following table (Table 2) exhibits diametrical contrasts between Τ
and the believer in Pauline accounts:
Therefore, if we take the coherence of Paul's terminology for granted, it is
assuredly impossible from the data presented above to infer to identify the
Τ of Rom. 7:7-25 with a Christian believer. The man Τ cannot, however,
be easily classified into unbeliever either, for he admits that the Mosaic
Law and commandments, its constituent parts, as "holy and righteous and
good" (v. 12) and even as "spiritual" (v. 14), delighting "in the law of God
according to the inner man" (w. 22, 25b). 5 4 These things directly collide
against what Paul tells about the unbeliever (cf. 8:5-7).
Putting all together, the Τ of 7:7-25 is a person who acknowledges the
Mosaic Law as holy, righteous, good, and spiritual, and thus serves it,
expecting that he will get the righteousness and salvation of God by observ­
ing it. Nevertheless, he is watching himself doing always evil against his
inner person who wishes to do good deeds according to the law. He finds
the reason in "the sin that dwells in me" (ή οικούσα έν έμοί αμαρτία, ν. 20).
He calls this "sin" a ruling "law"/"principle" (ό νόμος της αμαρτίας, w. 23,
25) that "dwells in me, that is in my flesh" (έν έμοί, τοΰτ* έ'στιν έν τη σαρκί
μου, w. 17, 18a) or "in my members" (έν τοις μέλεσίν μου, ν. 23). He is
"fleshly, sold under the sin" (σάρκινος... πεπραμένος ύπο την άμαρτίαν,
v. I4b) and accordingly "serves the law of sin in captivity to it" (w. 23, 25).
Hence he cannot escape for a minute from the condemnation that leads to
death (w. 7-11, 13-20, 23-24, 25b).
Then we reach a conclusion that the person Τ of 7:7-25 is not a normal
Christian believer who is said to be regenerated by the indwelling Spirit
(8:9), justified through faith in Jesus Christ, so freed from every condem­
nation (8:1), and liberated from the law of sin and of death through the
law of the Spirit of life (8:2). This person vividly represents the situation of
those Jews and Judaizing Christians who unavailingly seek justification
and holiness by observing the Mosaic Law. Here Paul is most probably
looking back upon his own experience as a Pharisaic rabbi.
Even the 'flesh-Spirit' contrast in Rom. 8 and Gal. 5-6 is not to be under­
stood in terms of a dialectical antithesis ('both and' at the same time), but
in the proleptic perspective of Pauline redemptive history. Paul must have
regarded the Holy Spirit who, indwelling the believers, enables them to
keep the law as an assured sign that the eschatological salvation of the new
covenant age has already been fulfilled (cf. Rom. 8:1-14 par. Ezek. 36:26-
28; 37:5-6, 14 LXX). But the concept 'flesh' (σαρξ), whenever the apostle
characteristically uses it in contrast to the 'Spirit' (Rom. 8; 7:5, and Gal. 5-6),
denotes the anti-divine principle/nature in every man of this age, which,
however, for the believer still remains in him but has been already crucified
(Gal. 5:24) and superseded by the indwelling Spirit (Rom. 8:9).
Therefore, the Pauline texts in which the image of'struggle' (Gal. 5:16-17)
or 'groaning' (Rom. 8:23; 2 Cor. 5:4) is used for the Christians, and thus
regarded by Dunn as parallels to the 'struggle' and 'cry' of Τ in Rom. 7:14-25,
prove to be if we closely examine their respective contexts quite different
from each other:
Firstly, Paul's object in Gal. 5 is to show the way of victory, and not only
to show it, but also to guarantee it because of the Spirit who is within the
believer. However, this is not mentioned in Rom. 7.
1) The statement of Gal. 5:17 ("For the flesh sets its desire against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for these are in opposition to one
another, so that you may not do the things that you please") is only intro­
duced by saying in v. 16 ("But I say, walk by the Spirit, and you will not
carry out the desire of the flesh"). Hence Paul lays down a fundamental
proposition: 'If you walk in the Spirit (and I am commanding you to do
so) you shall not fulfill the desire of the flesh'. What we are told in Rom. 7,
however, is that in spite of every resolution to keep the law of God, the
man remains captive to "the law of sin which is in my members".
2) And again, notice that there is a factor in the Gal. passage, which is not
present at all in Rom. 7. It is the reference to the Holy Spirit. The whole
point of the passage in Gal. 5 is to emphasize the Spirit and His work: "But
I say, walk in the Spirit and you will not fulfill the desire of the flesh."
3) There is also another point of difference. In Gal. 5:18 there is what at
first sight seems a strange statement, "But if you are led by the Spirit, you
are not under the law". This verse is an exact parallel with what Paul says
in Rom. 6:14, which is as it were the key to the whole of Rom. 7. Rom. 7
is in a sense an exposition of Rom. 6:14, which says, "Sin shall not be
master over you", and for this reason, that "you are not under the law, but
under grace". Paul is saying the same thing in Gal. 5:18, though in a dif­
ferent way. He is showing, not only the possibility of victory, but also the
certainty of victory to those who realize this truth about themselves in
Christ, and in 'the Spirit'.
4) A further proof is the statement in Gal. 5:24: "And they that are Christ's
have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires". There is not a word
about that in Rom. 7. In Galatians, however, Paul says that that is true of
all Christians. Because they are Christ's they have done this; it has hap­
pened, they have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires. The whole
trouble with the man in Rom. 7 is that he cannot do this. His problem is
that the flesh is too much for him, and that he is being held as a captive all
along to "the law of sin which is in my members". We are entitled then to
draw this conclusion, that Gal. 5, far from saying the same as Rom. 7, not
only says the exact opposite, but also was intended to say the exact oppo­
site. Rom. 7 is concerned to show the state of failure of this man, who is
trying, as it were, to sanctify himself by the law. The whole point of Gal. 5
is to show us positively the success and the victory that attend the man
who is sanctifying himself, and dealing with the problem within himself
through the power of the Spirit. He is a man who is able to crucify the flesh
with its passions and desires and has no excuse for failure. There is not a
word about that in Rom. 7; but it will come in Rom. 8.
Secondly, the reason for the groaning in Rom. 8:23 is not the sin within
the believer, but the sufferings, trials, troubles, and tribulations that come
to believer in this life, just as in 2 Cor. 5:4. Dunn deduces from these pas­
sages that the fully regenerate Christian groans and mourns, believing that
Rom. 7 is a description of such a man.
1) There is a perfect parallel, as claimed, between the cry of Rom. 7:24
("Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from this body of death?")
and 8:23 ("And not only this, but also we ourselves, having the first fruits
of the Spirit," [here is the fully regenerate man] "even we ourselves groan
within ourselves, waiting eagerly for [our] adoption as sons, the redemp­
tion of our body"). Are they actually parallel statements?
To start with, notice that in Rom. 8:23 there is this vital addition, which
is absent from Rom. 7—"we ourselves, having the first fruits of the Spirit".
Not a word concerning this is found in Rom. 7. But the argument does
not depend upon that alone. The answer to this interpretation is simply
this, that in the relevant section in Rom. 8 Paul is not considering the
struggle, which a man has with sin within himself, but his struggle with sin
in the world, sin in circumstances, sin in trials, troubles, and tribulations
that come to us in this life.
In order to prove that, let us go back to 8:17: "If children, heirs also,
heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ, if indeed we suffer with [him]."
"Suffer with Christ" here cannot mean suffering because of sin in the body,
because Christ never did suffer in that way. In this context Paul in Rom. 8:17
onwards is dealing with "suffering with him, that we may be also glorified
together". Observe what he goes on to say: "For I consider that the suffer­
ings of this present time" (the sufferings in which we find ourselves in this
world) "are not worthy to be compared with the glory that is to be revealed
to us" (v. 18). In addition, to make it doubly certain he says, "For the ear­
nest expectation of the creature" (the brute, the animal creation) "waits
for the revealing of the sons of God. For the creature was subjected to
futility," he means now, the animals and everything that is in the brute
creation "not of its own will, but because of Him who subjected it, in
hope, because the creature itself also will be set free from its slavery to cor­
ruption" (Rom. 8:19-21).
Do these words indicate a fight against indwelling sin? Do the animals
have to fight against indwelling sin? Of course, they do not. What they
have to fight is 'nature red in tooth and claw'. Paul refers to the kind of
'agony' of the cosmos, the struggle in the whole of life that entered in
because of the Fall, and because, when man sinned, God 'cursed the
ground' (Gen. 3:17). This struggle belongs to the whole of nature and
creation; "We know that the whole creation groans and suffers the pains of
childbirth together until now. And not only this, but also we ourselves,
having the first fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within our­
selves, waiting eagerly for [our] adoption as sons, the redemption of our
body" (Rom. 8:22-23). In other words, though the Christian is redeemed
and regenerate he is Irving in a world of sin, a world of sorrow, a world of
pain, a world of suffering, a world of evil, ugliness, foulness; and he is sub­
ject to illness and diseases. This is the theme of Rom. 8:17-23. Paul does
not even consider there the problem, which is dealt with in Rom. 7, but
how frequently is this missed simply because he uses the word "groans".
2) But what about 2 Cor. 5? In 2 Cor. 5:2-3 we read, "For indeed in this
[house] we groan, longing to be clothed with our dwelling from heaven;
inasmuch as we, having put it on, shall not be found naked." Then again
in v. 4, "For indeed while we are in this tent, we groan, being burdened,
because we do not want to be unclothed, but to be clothed, in order that
what is mortal may be swallowed up by life". Again, it is claimed that this
is a similar case to that of the "wretched man" of Rom. 7. It is argued that
the burden is the load of sin, the "sin that is in my members", and this is
leading me into captivity. Here, it is claimed, the fully regenerate man is
speaking, and we seem to be told that he is "groaning" because of his bur­
den of sin, and longing for his glorification.
What is the answer? Here again, however, we must point out that Paul
is not speaking of the subject with which he is dealing in Rom. 7. His
theme is the same as that of Rom. 8:18-26. The context proves this. Paul
begins on the theme of 2 Cor. 5:1-5 in 2 Cor. 4:7-8: "We have this treasure
in earthen vessels, that the surpassing greatness of the power may be of
God and not from ourselves; [we are] afflicted in every way, but not
crushed; perplexed, but not despairing; persecuted
" He is dealing with
things outside himself, not inside himself "persecuted, but not forsaken;
struck down, but not destroyed; always carrying about in the body the
dying of Jesus. We who live are constantly being delivered over to death for
Jesus' sake."
This describes the kind of life Paul was living externally then. "So death
works in us, but life in you" (2 Cor. 4:12). "All things [are] for your sakes...
Therefore we do not lose heart, but though our outer man is decaying, yet
our inner man is being renewed day by day. Our light affliction"—that is
to say, the things outside ourselves—"which is but for a moment, is pro­
ducing for us an eternal weight of glory far beyond all comparison"
(w. 15-17). And to prove that they are outside, he says, "While we look
not at the things which are seen" (outside us), "but at the things which are
not seen" (v. 18). And then follows 5:1, "For we know that if the earthly
tent which is our house is torn down"—if they kill us, if they martyr u s —
"we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens". Therefore, in this 2 Cor. passage Paul is dealing with the tri­
als and the tribulations, the persecutions and the sufferings of Christian
people because they are Christians. It is not at all the same problem, the
same question, as is dealt with in Rom. 7.
The subsidiary issue of the identity of the 'Γ (εγώ) in Rom. 7 is still impor­
tant, because it decisively influences on the self-consciousness of the Chris­
tian as well as on his understanding of sanctification. We have seen that
Rom. 7:14-25 is not, as Dunn insists, a self-portrait of the apostle him­
self, neither a psychological description of the mature or non-mature
Christian's inner life. This passage is a part of the rhetorical discourse in
which Paul explicates, from his Christian viewpoint, the negative function
of the Mosaic Law, i.e., clarifies its goodness as well as its impotence, as
the most delicate issue representing his gospel. Here Paul is reflecting upon
his own experience as a Pharisee as well as the similar situation of those
Jews or Judaizing Christians who seek a way of justification through the
Mosaic Law.
The Christian's status and life that Paul shows us in Rom. 6, 8, and 7:1-6,
evidently connote the eschatological tension, but this tension does not have
a dialectical character. It is because Pauline eschatology puts a decisive
weight on the 'already' accomplished in Jesus Christ^ and thus unfolds
itself in the perspective that it experiences in the Spirit as the απαρχή
(Rom. 8:23) or the άρραβών (2 Cor. 1:22; 5:5) proleptically liberation from
the law, the sin, and the flesh, confidently anticipating the final victory.
Rom. 6 proves that our sanctification is guaranteed because of our union
with Christ, which is expounded in Rom. 5:12-21. Rom. 7 really proves
exactly the same point in a different way. There, he is concerned to prove
that our sanctification is guaranteed because we have been set free from the
law and tied to, and married to, the Lord Jesus Christ. The business of
Rom. 6 is to show positively what our union with Christ does achieve and
will achieve. Rom. 7 is mainly concerned to show what the law cannot do,
Rom. 6 what Christ can do.
Rom. 7 was simply a digression, a parenthesis to prove to those who
were not clear about this, that they really must stop thinking about the law
and its observance from the standpoint of either of justification or sancti­
fication. Rom. 7:14-25 does that in particular, leading to that climax in
which Paul shows the utter hopelessness of a man who sees the spirituality
of the law but does not see how to be delivered from it. The picture in
Rom. 7:14-25 is that of a man who realizes the condemnation of the law
and no more. All his thinking is in terms of the law and his relationship to
it. Rom. 7 is nothing but a hypothetical, imaginary picture painted by Paul
of a man who sees the complete hopelessness of salvation by the law.
Rom. 8 shows how the Christian thinks about himself, what the Chris­
tian really does know to be true about himself. The Christian is here not a
man who talks about nothing but the law of God. When the Christian
talks about his sin and failure he does not talk about it primarily in terms
of the law; he talks about it in terms of love, about his failure to please the
One who has died for him, and his failure to live to His glory. The believer
does not go on speaking in terms of the law as the man in Rom. 7 does for
he is no longer "under the law" but "under grace". Furthermore, the believer
must never allow himself to feel the condemnation of the law. A Christian
should chide himself for doing so. The whole object of Rom. 8 is to empha­
size "no condemnation... no separation" (w. 1, 35-39) and to guarantee
that whoever walks "according to the Spirit" fulfills το δικαίωμα του νόμου
56
(Rom. 8:4).