Έάν μή in Gal. 2:16 sat on the sidelines of debates in Pauline studies until
James Dunn challenged the traditional understanding of 2:16a, that justi­
fication is by faith, not by works of the law. Some scholars, following
Dunn's lead, now interpret the first part of the verse to mean that one
could be justified by works of the law as long as these works are accompa­
nied by faith in Christ. 1 The difference in interpretation hinges on έαν
μή. The verse reads, είδότες [δε] δτι ου δικαιούται άνθρωπος εξ έργων
νόμου εάν μή δια πίστεως Ίησοΰ Χρίστου, και ημείς εις Χριστόν Τησοΰν
έπιστεύσαμεν, ίνα δικαιωθώμεν εκ πίστεως Χρίστου και ούκ εξ έργων
νόμου, οτι εξ έργων νόμου ου δικαιωθήσεται πάσα σαρξ.
The two traditional views are that έαν μή is adversative or that it is
exceptive only of the principal part of the statement, namely, ού δικαιούται
άνθρωπος. 2 If έαν μή is adversative in Gal. 2:16, it sets έργα νόμου and
πίστις Χρίστου in antithesis. The idea then is that one is not justified
through works of the law but only through faith in Jesus Christ. On the
other hand, if έαν μή is exceptive only of the main point, Paul says that one
is not justified at all except by faith. The two views differ more in emphasis
than essence, and both are consistent with 2:16b.
Dunn, however, reads έαν μή as exceptive of the entire preceding state­
ment, ού δικαιούται άνθρωπος έξ έργων νόμου, so that justification is not
by works of the law unless faith in Christ attends the works. Dunns view
has the advantage that έαν μή is normally exceptive of the entire statement
preceding (or, in some cases, following) it. The most obvious problem with
this understanding in Gal. 2:16, however, is that it contradicts the rest of
the verse. Verse 16 would first say that the law justifies so long as there is
faith and then reverse itself to say that faith justifies and works of law do not.
To handle this problem, Dunn proposes that the difference is purposeful
because Paul is recording the changes his understanding of justification
underwent as he spoke to Peter. 3 As a result, justification by faith in Christ
and justification through works of the law "[which] were initially juxtaposed
as complementary [in 2:16a], are now posed as straight alternatives [in
2:16b] ." 4 However, if Paul only apprehended mid-sentence that justification
is unrelated to works of law, why did he begin to rebuke Peter in the first
place? At that time he had not yet realized the flaw in Peter s thinking.
William Walker, Jr., who is convinced that Dunn has properly under-
stood the grammatical use of έαν μή as exceptive of the entire preceding
clause, supplies in brackets a clause he believes to be an ellipsis in the verse.
He translates, " . . . knowing that a person is not justified by works of law
([a person is not justified] except through faith in Jesus Christ), we also have
come to faith in Christ Jesus in order that we might be justified by faith in
Christ and not by works of law, because by works of law no one is justified." 5
This additional clause preserves both the common grammatical function
of εάν μή and the consistency of Paul's thought. However, if έαν μή could
only relate to a clause in its entirety, Paul elided more than he could afford
to because he would necessarily be understood exactly as Dunn has under­
stood him.
Although I believe that other scholars have rightly criticized Professor
Dunns analysis, I have not found in their criticisms the grammatical evi­
dence necessary to support other positions. Έαν μή as exceptive of an
entire statement is the rule both inside and outside the NT. If Paul does
not use it as exceptive of the whole preceding statement (including εξ
έργων νόμου) in 2:16, does the grammar of his time permit him the options
scholars suggest? Out of approximately fifty occurrences of έαν μή in the
NT, Andrew Das found John 5:19 and 15:4 to use it adversatively. 6 And
aside from Gal. 2:16 I found no additional candidate in the N T for either
traditional category. In fact, in most cases the statement έαν μή qualifies
cannot be divided into two or more components to allow either contrast
with or exception to a single part. This adds to the scarcity of such exam­
ples outside the N T as well. But such examples do exist. In this article I
intend to fill in the gap in the literature by citing examples to support both
of the traditional positions and then to show that έαν μή in Gal. 2:16 best
fits the adversative category.
Plutarch's Moralia contains an example of έαν μή that excepts only the
principal part of a statement. In De cohibenda ira ("On the Control of
Anger") Fundanus explains to Sulla that anger fills the soul with confusion
and noise so that the soul cannot see or hear what might help it. A ship
abandoned at sea in the midst of a storm has a better chance of taking on
board a pilot from the outside than a man tossed by anger has of admitting
the reasoning of another unless (αν μή) he had prepared his own powers of
reason to receive it. So an angry man who had previously prepared himself
to listen to reason is an exception to the rule that angry men close their ears
to reason, and αν μή here is clearly exceptive. Seeing the way αν μή func­
tions in this sentence is necessary for understanding the role of έαν μή a
few lines later.
Fundanus continues by saying, ουδέ γαρ ακούει των έκτος ή ψυχή δια
τον θόρυβον, έαν μή καθάπερ κελευστήν ενδοθεν έ'χη {Moralia 454Α).
W.C. Helmbold translates, "For the soul hears nothing from the outside
because of its tumult [the noise inside] unless it has its own reason within."
If έαν μή were exceptive of the entire statement preceding it, it would
mean that if the soul has its own reason, it hears from the outside because
of the noise inside—clearly not Plutarch's point. If έαν μή were adversative,
it would mean that "the soul hears nothing from the outside (because of its
noise), but it has its own reason within," which denies the possibility of ever
hearing from the outside when there is noise inside. But the statement a
few lines earlier (with the exceptive αν μή) allows the possibility that an
angry man could accept another's reason if prepared to do so. Therefore,
also, Plutarch does not set "noise" and "reason" in antithesis since he acknowl­
edges that they may co-exist. Έαν μή here is exceptive of the principal part
of the sentence: Plutarch says that noise prevents the soul from hearing
what is outside except in the case that the soul has kept its reasoning power
within itself.
Other examples exist having the form "X cannot be done otherwise
(άλλως) except by Y." Origen, for instance, writes of people who are persuaded
that μή άλλως οίκειωθήναι δύνασθαι τω θεώ, έαν μή και δια σωφροσύνης
άναβώσι προς αυτόν. 8 Frederick Crombie translates, "they cannot otherwise
have communion with God, unless they ascend to Him through the exer-
cise of temperance." 9 If έαν μή were exceptive of the entire preceding state­
ment, it would mean that people have other ways to commune with God
while they commune with him by temperance, which is not the author's
point. In addition, because Origen does not contrast temperance with a
specific or significant alternative but only with "otherwise," έαν μή does
not set up a meaningful adversative relationship. Instead the quote is
equivalent to "they cannot have communion with God unless they ascend
to him through the exercise of temperance," which simply omits "other­
wise" from the original. Therefore it seems best to classify έαν μή in this
example as exceptive of the main part of the preceding statement. 10
Origen supplies another example in his commentary on Matthew. He
suggests that Jesus worked miracles so that οι μή άλλως πιστεύοντες, έαν
μή ΐδωσι σημεία και τέρατα, πιστεύσωσι. 11 John Patrick translates, "those
who would not otherwise have believed unless they saw signs and wonders
might believe." 12 Here Origen writes of people who would not have believed
in Christ without signs and wonders. Again, he does not say that if the
people saw signs and wonders they would believe on some basis other than
signs and wonders, and thus έαν μή is not exceptive of "those who would
not otherwise have believed." And again, έαν μή does not set up a meaningful
adversative relationship. Instead Origen says that some people would believe
only on the basis of signs and wonders, and έαν μή is exceptive of "those
who would not have believed," i.e., the principal part of the statement.
Epictetus in his Encheiridion says, άλλως δε ούχ οίον τε τοΰτο γίνεσθαι,
έαν μή αρης από των ουκ έφ' ήμίν καί έν τοις έφ' ήμίν μόνοις θής το αγαθόν
και το κακόν (31.2). W.A. Oldfather translates, "But this result [of piety
toward the gods] cannot be secured in any other way [άλλως] than [έαν
μή] by withdrawing your idea of the good and the evil from the things
which are not under our control, and placing it in those which are under
our control, and in those alone." 13 The same argument applies here as to
the examples from Origen. Epictetus does not say that if people apply the
idea of good and evil only to things under their control, then they will
secure piety some other way. Nor does he set up a contrast. Therefore, έαν
μή can be neither adversative nor exceptive of the entire preceding state­
ment. The author says, rather, that people only obtain piety by changing
their idea of good and evil. Thus έαν μή excepts the preceding statement
minus άλλως.
These examples show έαν μή as exceptive of the main clause minus the
phrase δια τον θόρυβον in Plutarch and minus the word άλλως in Origen
and Epictetus. Although I do not believe the έαν μή as a partial exception
is the best fit for Gal. 2:16, these examples do show that that interpretation
cannot be ruled out a priori.
Andrew Das cites two examples of adversative έαν μή in the NT. John 5:19
says, ού δύναται ό υιός ποιείν αφ έαυτοΰ ουδέν έαν μή τι βλέπη τον πατέρα
ποιοΰντα. Das translates, "the Son can do nothing on his own, but only
what he sees the Father doing." 14 Das argues that έαν μή does not offer an
exception to the entire preceding statement as if the Son could do some­
thing on his own as long as he sees the Father doing it. Instead John pits
"the Son doing nothing" against "the Son doing something." John 15:4 is
similar when it says, το κλήμα ού δύναται καρπον φέρειν αφ" έαυτοΰ έαν
μή μένη έν τή άμπέλω. ("The branch cannot bear fruit by itself but only
[as] it abides in the vine" [my translation].) Here again έαν μή does not
give an exception to the entire preceding statement but contrasts "by itself"
with "abiding in the vine." 15
Das does not consider that έαν μή might be exceptive only of the main
point, so we consider it now. 'Εάν μή in John 5:19 and 15:4, if exceptive
of the main point, would mean "the Son can do nothing except what he
sees the Father doing" and "the branch cannot bear fruit unless it abides in
the vine," respectively. Both make good sense. However an exceptive inter­
pretation renders "on his own" in John 5:19 and "of itself " in 15:4 superfluous
and thus loses the emphasis clearly intended in the text. Έαν μή, therefore,
is better understood here as adversative.
Uses of adversative έαν μή exist also in the Greek of Paul's time outside
the NT. Origen quotes John 5:19, complete with αφ'έαυτοΰ, as in Das's
example. 16 More significantly, in his Commentary on Matthew, Origen uses
adversative έαν μή when he says, Δοκει δέ μοι, δτι ώσπερ έπι των σωματικών,
οΰτε αυτάρκης γεωργία προς συγκομιδήν καρπών, έαν μή το περιεχόμενον
εις τοΰτο συνεργή. 1 ^ John Patrick translates, "Now it seems to me that, as
in the case of material things, tillage is not sufficient in itself for the gather­
ing in of the fruits, unless the air cooperates to this end." 18 Origen is not
saying that if the air cooperates with the tillage then the tillage is sufficient
by itself, i.e., without the cooperation of the air, for growing crops. There­
fore, έαν μή is not exceptive of the whole of the prior statement. In addition,
if Origen had omitted "of itself," the gist of his statement would remain
intact; but, as in the case of the N T examples, it would lose its emphasis.
Origen contrasts tillage by itself with tillage in combination with the air, as
the context verifies. Therefore έαν μή as adversative is preferable to έαν μή
as exceptive of only the main part of the leading statement.
A third example is from Origen's Against Celsus. When Celsus fails to
see the reason for the coming of the Son of God, he explores whether it
might be for the purpose of making people better. Then he objects, ~Ap*
ούχ οίον τε αύτω δυνάμει θεία έπανορθοΰν, έαν μή φύσει τινά έπι τοΰτο
πέμψη; 19 Frederick Crombie translates, "Is it then not possible for him
[God], by means of his divine power, to make (men) better, unless he send
some one for that special purpose?" 20 Again, έαν μή is not exceptive of the
entire previous statement. Otherwise, it would say that if God sent some­
one to improve humanity, he could then improve them directly by his
divine power, i.e., without anyone else's involvement—a self-contradictory
statement. Instead, with adversative έαν μή, Celsus sets God's use of direct
divine power against his sending someone to accomplish his purpose.
Clement of Alexandria uses έαν μή similarly when he says, ού γαρ μόνον
ή εύνουχία δίκαιοι, ουδέ μήν το του ευνούχου σάββατον, έαν μή ποιήση
τάς έντολάς. 21 John Ferguson translates, "To be a eunuch does not of itself
make a person righteous, still less the eunuch's keeping of the sabbath, unless
he performs the commandments." Simply becoming a eunuch would not
guarantee a man a righteous standing: for this he must also keep the com­
mandments. By means of έαν μή, Clement contrasts "of itself" with "[also]
performs the commandments," a contrast comparable to those in the pre­
vious examples.
Dionysius of Halicarnassus provides an earlier example of adversative έαν
μή in Roman Antiquities 10.31.5 when he says, τοις δ" άρα πασιν ή ν ταύτα
κατ' αρχάς δεδογμένα μήτ είσηγήσασθαί τίνα καινον πολίτευμα μηθέν έφ*
έαυτοΰ βαλόμενον, έαν μή πασι το αυτό δοκή, μήτε έναντιωθήναί τίνα τοις
πραττομένοις οσ" αν αί πλείους γνώμαι δοκιμάσωσι. Earnest Cary trans­
lates, "Now the tribunes had all come to this decision at the outset, that no
one of their number should either introduce any new measure on his own
initiative, unless they all concurred in it, or oppose any proceedings which
met with the approval of the majority 7 ." 23 Again έφ" έαυτοΰ ("on his own
initiative") prevents έαν μή from being exceptive of the entire initial state­
ment. Here Dionysius' point is that the tribunes did not want any of their
number acting independently, and he uses adversative έαν μή to contrap­
ose acting on one's own initiative and working together as a body.
The citations from Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Plutarch, the Gospel of
John, Epictetus, Clement of Alexandria, and Origen were written between
I B.c.E. and III C.E. The list of examples is long enough to substantiate the
flexibility of έαν μή to state both a partial exception and an adversative
relationship. The difference between the two functions is primarily one of
emphasis, as explanations with the examples cited show. If the extra word
or phrase in the main clause is important enough to serve as a point of
contrast, έαν μή is adversative. If not, it is exceptive. Does Gal. 2:16 fit
either category?
Andrew Das argues for an ambiguous use of έαν μή in Gal. 2:16. He
finds in Galatians three perspectives of early Jewish Christianity: (1) Gen­
tile Christians are obligated to keep the law; (2) Gentile Christians are not
obligated by the law except at times of table fellowship with Jewish Chris-
tians; (3) Gentile Christians have no obligation to the law. Das then argues
that since 2:16a clearly states common ground between Paul and his listeners,
it must be ambiguous enough to include all three positions, with Paul
interpreting it one way and his opponents another. Its very ambiguity,
however, forces Paul to restate his position in the latter part of the verse.
Das suggests that 2:16a may have been a statement Paul's opponents taught
which Paul co-opted in order to reinterpret. 24
By speaking in 2:15 of "we Jews" and beginning 2:16 with "knowing
that," Paul clearly does seek to establish common ground. Reinterpreting
to his own advantage the statement on which all had agreed, however, is a
bait-and-switch that destroys the common ground he built, and his oppo-
nents would easily shoot down such an argument. Paul defeats his own
purpose if he uses 2:16a ambiguously.
Das argues against an adversative possibility in Galatians on the grounds
that έαν μή occurs only eleven other times in the undisputed Pauline cor­
pus and is exceptive of the entire preceding statement in each case. 25 But to
require that Paul use a term more than once in any particular way is com­
parable to classifying the hapax legomena in his letters as interpolations
simply because he does not repeat them in his few extant writings. Writers
may develop a word or phrase as something of a technical term—such as
"in Christ" in Paul or John. Yet their language is not so stylized that they
could not avail themselves of the broad range of meaning, proper to the
Greek of the time, for a common conjunction or preposition.
As we have seen, έαν μή in Gal. 2:16 cannot be exceptive of the entire
main clause. To see whether it is adversative or whether it allows a partial
exception, we consider the phrase, έξ έ'ργων νόμου, in verse 16a to see
whether it serves as a contrast to δια πίστεως Ιησοΰ Χρίστου or whether it
is an extraneous phrase simply to be skipped over (as in Plutarch). To state
the issue, however, is almost to solve the problem. In 2:16b Paul unques­
tionably contrasts έ'ργα νόμου and πίστις Χρίστου. In 2:19, 21 he continues
writing about the law (νόμος) and in 3:2, 5 he contrasts έ'ργα νόμου with
ακοή πίστεως. Έργα νόμου is not an extraneous phrase in Gal. 2-3 but an
integral part of the context. Therefore, έαν μή in Gal. 2:16 is adversative. 26
That έαν μή in Gal. 2:16 indicates a contrast or a partial exception was
accepted until recent times. Against this, James Dunn argued that έαν μή
can only function to give an exception to the entire main clause and there­
fore concluded from Gal. 2:16 that Paul only came to comprehend the
implications of the gospel as he spoke to Peter. The problem here, however,
is that Paul could not begin to rebuke Peter before he understood the fault
in Peter's behavior, and Paul must therefore have understood the implica­
tions of the gospel before he spoke to him. Although the impossibility of
Dunn's view does not establish the existence of adversative or partially
exceptive έαν μή, other koine texts confirm both in the Greek of Paul's
time.
Έαν μή in Gal. 2:16 cannot state an exception to the entire main clause.
Does it fit into the category of either alternative considered here? Our
examination of the examples shows the difference between the two alterna­
tives to depend upon the word or phrase with the main clause which could
not be part of the exception. Έαν μή is adversative if the context sets up a
contrast between that word or phrase and another in the sentence. Other­
wise, έαν μή states a partial exception. In Galatians Paul sets πίστις Χρίστου
and έ'ργα νόμου in opposition. He introduces the contrast in Gal. 2:16
with adversative έαν μή according to the proper, albeit infrequent, practice
of his day.