In arguing for the basic historicity of Jesus' dispute with the Sadducees over
resurrection in Mark 12:18-27 parr., 1 John Meier emphasizes the criterion
of discontinuity. 2 He points to such factors as the lack of a realistic Sitz
im Leben that could explain the story's invention by the early church and
the complete absence in both Jewish and early Christian literature of other
appeals to Exod. 3:6 as a proof for resurrection. The main force of his argu-
ment from discontinuity, however, falls on his observation that Jesus'
manner of arguing for a general resurrection in this passage differs mark-
edly from the manner in which the early Christians argued for a general
resurrection:
In the debate in Mk 12.18-27, Jesus handles both the how (manner) and the that (fact)
of the resurrection quite differently from the early Christians. Jesus answers the how by
a comparison to the angels and the that by an appeal to Exod. 3.6. The early Chris-
tians, instead, handle both the how (see Phil. 3.21) and the that (1 Cor. 15.12-20)
simply by pointing to the risen Jesus. 3
In short, Meier argues for the pericope's historicity by suggesting that early
Christians who wanted to prove a general resurrection would have appealed
to Jesus' resurrection rather than invent a story that sought to achieve this
polemical task simply by citing a single scripture passage whose relevance
to the discussion was far from established.
Meier's cogent observations naturally raise the question of whether this
difference in theological reasoning between Jesus and the N T authors
implies a corresponding difference in their underlying theologies of resurrec-
tion. That is to say, are the N T authors' christological justifications of resur-
rection ultimately grounded in the same scriptural understanding that Jesus'
answer here presupposes? Or, to put the matter in yet another way, how
well does the understanding of resurrection expressed in Mark 12:26-27a
cohere with the wider N T portrayal of a general resurrection?
Given the proposed historicity of Mark 12:18-27, 4 the threefold inclu-
sion of this pericope in the NT, and the foundational significance of both
Jesus and resurrection in early Christian theology, one might expect the
portrayal of resurrection in this passage to have a fairly integral and reso-
nant relationship to other N T discussions of resurrection. Scholarship,
however, has often argued otherwise, frequendy interpreting Mark 12:26-27a
in a way that renders its theology of resurrection essentially incompatible
with and/or irrele\ ant to the understanding of resurrection expressed else­
where in the NT. This state of affairs can be traced directly to two related
exegetical difficulties in the passage.
First, it is not immediately clear how Jesus' citation of Exod. 3:6—"I
[am] the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of
5
Jacob" —concerns resurrection at all, let alone how the verse could pos­
sibly prove that the dead will be raised. Second, Jesus' seeming inference
from this citation that " [God] is not a god of dead people but of living"
(Mark 12:27a) sounds as if it would be more appropriate concluding an
argument for some kind of immortality rather than an argument for resur­
rection. A twofold quandary thus faces the interpreter: Jesus' argument
does not actually seem to prove anything, but if it does prove anything, it
seems to prove immortality, not resurrection.
The latter of these difficulties has led some scholars to conclude that
Jesus here defines resurrection in terms of immortality. John Donahue, for
instance, argues that the
view of resurrection [in \4ark 12:26-27] is... different from... [the view in] 1 Cor
15:35-41 since in Alark there is virtually no hint of the resurrection and/or transfor­
mation of the body, but rather a way of speaking closer to a doctrine of immortality....
[For the Markan Jesus,] [r]esurrection is not return from the grave, but enduring life
hidden in the power of God. 6
In other words, Jesus here describes a non-physical form of resurrection
that stands in stark contrast to the emphasis on the physical resurrection of
both Christ and believers elsewhere in the N T (and, it must be added, in stark
contrast to the usual meaning of the word άνάστασις, "resurrection").
The NT's later christological justifications that tie a general resurrection of
believers to the physical resurrection of Christ would thus oppose the view
of resurrection implied by this reading of Jesus' scriptural proof. 8
Even for scholars who contend that the passage does concern physical
resurrection, the former of the exegetical difficulties listed above often
gives rise to an interpretation that renders Jesus' theology of resurrection
irrelevant to the rest of the N T witnesses. One of the most common expla-
nations of the function of Exod. 3:6—that the assumed present tense of
the implied verb suggests that the patriarchs are still living—essentially
interprets Jesus as arguing based on the fact of the patriarchs' continuing
existence rather than on the reason for that existence. This interpretive
move means that the later appeals to Christ's resurrection would have
effectively replaced this scriptural argument: rather than pointing to the
patriarchs, whose continuing existence presumably ensures their eventual
resurrection, Christians could simply point to an already resurrected Jesus.
(The resulting irrelevance of Jesus' argument has an added theological
benefit for many Christian scholars: it frees them to dismiss his, in this
reading, less-than-compelling logic without having to surrender their own
belief in resurrection.)
Is Jesus' justification of resurrection in Mark 12:26-27a truly as theolo-
gically dissonant with the witness of the later N T authors as these inter-
pretations indicate? I suggest that it is not, and that the perceived dissonance
arises from a misunderstanding of Jesus' argument. Of course, to prove this
claim thoroughly would require that I analyze the theology of resurrection
in Mark 12:26-27a and then compare the resulting picture with the theol-
ogy indicated by the rest of the resurrection-related passages in the NT.
Such comprehensive analysis lies well beyond the scope of this article.
Instead, the article will focus primarily on the first (and more manageable)
part of this project, namely, the analysis of resurrection in Mark 12:26-
27a: how, exactly, does Jesus' argument work?
I will argue that God's faithfulness to his continuing covenant with
Abraham provides the key to understanding Jesus' line of reasoning. There
is a sense in which this suggestion is not new. An increasing number of
scholars have, after all, claimed that God's covenantal faithfulness forms an
important part of Jesus' argument. 9 Yet even these interpreters seem to have
overlooked what I regard as the crucial step of Jesus' logic: God s faithfulness
to his covenant implies the patriarchs continuing existence since the patriarchs
death would have released God from his covenantal obligations.
In order to make its case, this article will consider the context of the
larger pericope, seeking to understand both the Sadducees' question and
the cohesiveness of Jesus' answer as a response to that question. As part of
this analysis, I will examine the two exegetical cruxes in 12:26-27a (and
their proposed resolutions) in greater detail. Finally, lest the prompting
question of theological coherence be forgotten, I will briefly discuss how
this interpretation resolves the theological difficulties identified above.
Appearing as the second of three vignettes in which religious leaders ques-
tion Jesus, Mark 12:18-27 describes a dispute between Jesus and the Sad-
ducees over resurrection. The pericope itself constitutes a self-contained
unit composed of two main parts: the Sadducees' rather involved question
(12:18-23) and Jesus' response (12:24-27). I will discuss each of these
components in turn.
The Sadducees present Jesus with a hypothetical scenario: seven brothers
successively marry the same woman in accordance with the Mosaic law of
levirate marriage. Nevertheless, the woman, who outlives all seven of her
husbands, eventually dies childless. The Sadducees then want to know
whose wife she will be in the resurrection.
The inquiry, of course, is not sincere; as Mark informs us at the outset of
the episode, the Sadducees did not actually believe in resurrection (12:18). 10
Accordingly, their constructed scenario appears to have been specifically
designed to bring out the absurdity of a belief in resurrection. At its most
basic level, the story highlights a perceived logistical problem with such a
belief: a woman who had outlived several spouses would suddenly find
them all simultaneously alive again. On what basis could one man's claim
to be her husband be legitimated over the others' claims?
The Sadducees' presentation, however, significantly strengthens the
force of this basic question. As their introductory citation of Deut. 25:5
indicates, the Mosaic law itself requires the woman to have taken these
seven husbands. In other words, it is precisely her obedience to God's com­
mand that would have created this absurd situation in the resurrection. 11
Nor would this problem arise only in inconsequential cases: the Sadducees'
additional allusion to the fulfillment of this law in the lives of Judah and
Tamar ("raise up seed for your brother," Gen. 38:8; cf. Mark 12:19) implies
that the resolution of this issue affects even the patriarchs, the founders of
the faith. 12 Viewed in this light, a belief in resurrection threatens to make
a mockery of both the Mosaic law (scripture) and the patriarchs by impli­
cating them in this absurd scenario. That is to say, it threatens to make a
mockery of the very foundations of Jewish belief.
In addition to this overt attack, a wordplay involving the concept of
"raising up" (έξανίστημι, 12:19 / άνάστασις, άνίστημι, 12:23) suggests
that the scenario also levels a subtler critique against resurrection. The levi-
rate marriage law provides for the preservation of a man's place in Israel
through the "raising up" of offspring in his name. In the Sadducees' story,
however, none of the seven brothers are able to "raise up" such a child. J. Gerald
Janzen therefore argues that the scenario implies the following critique:
If God by the very means divinely provided in the Torah—the Levirate law—cannot
or will not raise up children to a dead man (not even after an ideal number of oppor­
tunities), on what basis is one entitled to hope that God either will or can raise up that
dead man himself—something for which the Mosaic Torah makes no provision at all? 13
The suggested lesser-to-greater logic of this implied argument follows a
common first-century Jewish exegetical principle {qal vahomer) 14 and
essentially critiques resurrection on two fronts: 1) if the natural "raising
up" of childbirth has failed, how much more so will the more difficult
"raising up" of resurrection, and 2) if the means for "raising up" provided
by the Torah have failed, how much more so will a "raising up" that is not
ordained by Torah. 15
Granting for the moment the presence of this implied critique, the Sad-
ducees' argument against resurrection operates on two levels. On a surface
level, they have constructed a scenario in which the application of the
scriptural levirate marriage law seems to render a belief in resurrection
problematic on logistical grounds. Lurking behind this seemingly innocent
request for logistical resolution, however, lies the more sinister suggestion
that the very existence of a scenario in which the levirate law could fail to
raise up offspring implicitly rules out the possibility of resurrection. The
question therefore functions as a trap: Jesus must address the proposed
logistical objection to resurrection, but any resolution he could give would
presumably entail an acceptance of the basic scenario that in and of itself
renders resurrection problematic.
Does such an analysis—based, as it is, on a proposed implied argu-
ment—read too much into the text? Two factors in addition to the word-
play suggest that it does not. First, the literary context leads a reader to
expect that the Sadducees' question will have some hidden twist. The pas-
sage comes as part of an escalating conflict between Jesus and the Jewish
leaders in the Temple courts. In Mark 11:27-33, Jesus traps the chief
priests, scribes, and elders with an unanswerable question of his own: "Was
the baptism of John from heaven or from men?" (11:29). He then further
infuriates them by speaking the parable of the vineyard against them
(12:1-11). As a result, these leaders desire to seize him, yet they cannot do
so because they fear the reactions of the crowd (12:12). They accordingly
withdraw from the scene and send people to question Jesus "so that they
might trap [άγρεύσωσιν] him in a statement" (12:13). In the ensuing series
of vignettes, representatives of various Jewish groups approach Jesus and
question him: the Pharisees and Herodians in 12:13-17, the Sadducees in
12:18-27, and a scribe in 12:28-34. Jesus responds masterfully to each
question, with the result that, after the third episode, "no one any longer
dared to ask him [anything]" (12:34). The proposal of an implicit trap in
the Sadducees' question fits perfectly into such a framework. 16
Three potential objections to this analysis of the literary context need to
be addressed. It is true, for instance, that the Jewish leaders are only explic-
itly said to send the Pharisees and Herodians to trap Jesus with their ques-
tion about paying taxes to Caesar (12:13). Nevertheless, the arrival of the
Sadducees with an equally hypocritical question immediately after the first
group's failure to ensnare Jesus suggests that they also form a part of the
leaders' plot, 1 especially since the Sadducees—who can be linked to the
high priests of 11:18 on socio-political grounds as well 18 —appear nowhere
else in Mark's gospel. The suggested trap in the Sadducees' question is also
admittedly subtler than the Pharisees' trap, but such escalation should be
expected after Jesus had so cunningly discerned and avoided the first
attempt. Finally, the scribe's question about the greatest commandment in
12:28-34—the third and final question in the series—does not seem to
function as a trap, thereby seeming to break the proposed pattern. The text
explicitly states, however, that he asks his question after being drawn to the
group by the earlier arguments (12:28), i.e., he is clearly not involved in
the leaders' plot. Significantly, he is also the only questioner whom Jesus
praises instead of rebuking (12:34). 19
In addition to the wordplay and the literary context, Jesus' response
itself argues for the presence of this implicit trap in the Sadducees' ques-
tion. As the following section of this article will contend, Jesus not only
solves the Sadducees' logistical problem, he also addresses and refutes their
implied critique that denies resurrection on the grounds that it 1) repre-
sents a more difficult "raising up" than the natural reproduction that has
failed and 2) is not prescribed in Torah. While Jesus could theoretically
have discerned a deeper theological issue of which his questioners were
unaware, his harsh rebuke and the other indications of a hidden trap
imply the Sadducees' duplicity.
Jesus' response consists of three parts: a frame asserting that the Sadducees
are mistaken (12:24, 27b), a statement that there will be no marrying in
the resurrection (12:25), and a proof that the dead will be raised (12:26-
27a). As I intend to show below, the three components function as a cohe-
sive whole that effectively addresses both aspects of the Sadducees' challenge.
The analysis will begin with the frame.
Jesus' charge that the Sadducees are mistaken (12:24, 27b) appears some-
what curious, at least initially. After all, the Sadducees have simply pre-
sented a possible scenario and asked a question; they have not made any
overt claims. As we saw above, however, their "question" actually implies
two claims: 1) the surface claim that the scriptures (and the levirate mar-
riage law in particular) render a belief in resurrection problematic and
2) the underlying claim that God's failure to act in the simpler "raising up"
of offspring precludes the possibility of his "raising up" the dead. Jesus
accordingly asserts through his opening rhetorical question that the Saddu-
cees are mistaken because they understand neither the scriptures (claim #1)
nor the power of God (claim #2). In other words, Jesus' opening remark
reveals that he has discerned the Sadducees' trap.
The twofold nature of this opening critique naturally suggests a pro-
grammatic correspondence to the two internal segments of Jesus' response.
I accordingly propose that the two internal components (12:25 and 12:26-
27a) demonstrate how the Sadducees have misunderstood the scriptures
and the power of God respectively. That is to say, I will argue that the state-
ment in 12:25 regarding the lack of marrying in the resurrection refutes
the Sadducees' actual question about the woman and her seven husbands
(claim #1) by revealing their misunderstanding of the very scripture to
which they have appealed. The resurrection proof in 12:26-27a then refutes
the underlying challenge posed by the scenario as a whole (claim #2) by
showing that such a critique essentially questions God's power.
This suggestion reverses the typical scholarly conclusion. Having rightly
sensed the programmatic nature of Jesus' opening remark, many scholars
identify the explicit appeal to scripture in 12:26-27a as evidence that this
latter segment corresponds to the initial charge of misunderstanding the
scriptures. Such an association then leaves 12:25 to complete the chiasm as
the explanation of God's power. 20 1 will illustrate the difficulties with this
interpretation—which characteristically argues that the Sadducees have
misunderstood both the manner (12:25) and the fact (12:26-27a) of the
resurrection 21 —as I proceed through the analysis of the internal compo-
nents of Jesus' response.
esus begins his actual rebuttal of the Sadducees' question in 12:25 with a
statement about the lack of marrying in the resurrection:
For when they rise from among the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage,
but they are like angels in the heavens.
As part of the chiastic analysis of Jesus' response, many scholars interpret
this statement to mean that God's power will so transform the body in the
resurrection—"they are like angels"—that the marriage state will be tran-
scended. 22 Jesus thus refutes the Sadducees by highlighting the new state of
resurrection existence that God's power will bring about.
The chief problem with the chiastic explanation of Jesus' answer lies
in this analysis of 12:25: this reading assumes that it is the nature of the
resurrection that renders the Sadducees' argument irrelevant. In fact, this
assumption appears even in interpretations that do not tie this verse to
God's power. Craig Evans, for instance, finds Jesus here to be making a
point about scripture, namely, that scripture nowhere suggests that "the
marriage state continues after the resurrection" (italics added). 23 Although
he understands Jesus' logic differently, Evans still identifies resurrection as
the event that enables a transcending of the marital bond.
While this scholarly emphasis on resurrection is understandable given
the pericope's topic, it does not adequately account for the sole emphasis
on the process of marrying in Jesus' response. 24 This emphasis is all the more
curious since it at first seems to form a non sequitur to the preceding ques-
tion. The Sadducees, after all, had not asked, "Which of the seven will she
marry?" No, their question—"Whose wife will she be?"—presumes that
the woman's marital relationship with at least one of the brothers would
continue into the resurrected state. 2 ^ Indeed, the absurdity that their ques-
tion is intended to imply with regard to resurrection depends upon this
assumption: the scenario presents a conundrum only if the resurrected
woman would suddenly find herself with seven living husbands. As a cri-
tique of resurrection, then, the Sadducees' question becomes moot if the
woman would have to re-marry one of the brothers. 26
Contrary to the Sadducees' assumption, Jesus' reply effectively implies
that for this hypothetical woman to be the wife of one of the brothers, she
would have to re-marry. This implication then leads to the question of
when her previous marriages would have ended, the answer to which helps
explain why Jesus phrases his response solely in terms of re-marriage. I sug­
gest that Jesus does not refer to the dissolution of the woman's marital
bonds at the resurrection because those bonds would already have been
annulled. That is to say, I suggest that he refers only to re-marriage because
it is death—not, as the commentators all suggest, resurrection—that ter­
minates the marriage covenant. 2
This conclusion should not be surprising; even modern couples pledge
to love one another "'til death do us part." Paul's letters to the Romans and
the Corinthians establish this principle as the prevalent first-century under­
standing of marriage:
Or do you not know brothers (for I speak to those who know the law) that the law
rules over a person [only] as long as that person lives? For the married woman is bound
by law to a living husband. But if the husband dies, she is released from the law of the
husband. So then, while her husband lives, she will be called an adulteress if she is
joined to another man. But if her husband dies, she is free from the law, so as not to
be an adulteress even though she is joined to another man. (Rom. 7:1-3)
A woman is bound as long as her husband lives. But if the husband dies, she is free to
be married to whomever she desires, only in the Lord. (1 Cor. 7:39)
The Romans passage is especially significant since there Paul cites the prin­
ciple that death annuls a marriage bond as the shared premise from which
he then proceeds to argue his case. In other words, it is a premise with
which "those who know the law" could be assumed to agree. 28
We need not look to modern wedding ceremonies or to the letters of
Paul, however, in order to establish death as the moment when a marriage
ceases. The very levirate law that the Sadducees have cited depends upon
this fact. Otherwise, the woman marrying her late husband's brother(s)
would be an adulteress (cf. Rom. 7:3). The Sadducees have therefore mis-
understood, not God's power to transform the resurrected body, but the
nature of the marriage covenant implied by the very scripture passage on
which they have based their attack. Death breaks the marriage covenant,
releasing the surviving party from further obligation. Once Jesus exposes
this mistake, the absurdity of the Sadducees' scenario (and its accompany-
ing critique of resurrection) disappears.
Having thus refuted the Sadducees' explicit critique of resurrection, Jesus
then addresses their implied critique with his proof of resurrection in
12:26-27a:
But concerning the dead, that they are raised, have you not read in the book of Moses
[in the passage] about the bush how God spoke to him saying, "I [am] the God of
Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob." He is not a god of dead people
but of living.
I will argue below that this proof is grounded in the same principle as the
first part of Jesus' response, namely, that death ends a person's covenantal
obligations. Before explaining my interpretation, however, it will first be
helpful to survey and critique briefly the various other interpretations of
this passage. Explanations of Jesus' proof tend to ground the argument in
one of three factors: 1) lexical-grammatical issues, 2) God's nature as a
"god of the living," or 3) the literary context of the Exodus citation. More-
over, although mixtures and slight variations occur, scholars have essentially
proposed two distinct ways of construing Jesus' logic for each of these three
factors, leading to six main proposals. I will discuss each of these in turn.
Beginning with the lexical-grammatical solutions, Frédéric Manns sug-
gests that Jesus' logic here depends on an instance of al tiqra, a method of
exegeting Hebrew texts by reading the consonants with a different vowel
pointing. Basically, Manns argues that the phrase "[Moses calls] the Lord
the God of Abraham" (κύριον τον θεον Αβραάμ) in Luke 20:37 reflects the
ΕΠ"Ζ^... Ti^tf 7ΓΓΓ of Exod. 3:15. He then suggests that the initial ¡TiiT
("Lord") behind Luke's κύριον could, with a different vowel pointing, be
understood as a hiphil of ΓΓΠ ("to be") or even (by Jesus' listeners) as a
hiphil of ΓΓΠ ("to live"), yielding the meaning in Hebrew, "God causes
Abraham to be/live." 29 Although creative, this analysis makes Jesus' argu­
ment hinge on a Hebrew word play that is only recoverable through a
deconstruction of Luke's version. If correct, it would render Jesus' argu­
ment unintelligible in Matthew and Mark, not to mention in the surface
reading of Luke.
While Manns's interpretation has garnered little scholarly support, a
second grammatical explanation has long been one of the more influential
interpretations. In this widely held construal, the tense of the implied verb
provides the key to Jesus' case: the Lord says that he is the God of Abra­
ham, Isaac, and Jacob, not that he was their God. Thus, the argument goes,
Jesus takes the implied present tense of the reference to the patriarchs as
evidence that they must have still been alive in some sense. 30
Despite its widespread appeal, this proposal is problematic on several
grounds, foremost of which is that the all-important present-tense verb does
not even appear in Mark, Luke, or the M T of Exod. 3:6. In other words, the
single element on which, in this reading, the whole argument depends is
omitted, an odd circumstance to say the least. 31 Second, even assuming the
implied present tense of the verb, Exod. 3:6 is primarily a statement about
God (for whom the present tense would be appropriate), not about the patri­
archs: he is the God whom they ivorshipped. This observation then leads to a
third objection, namely that this reading of the citation violates the origi­
nal meaning of the verse in its Exodus context, transforming the passage
into a rather awkward proof-text.
Not surprisingly considering these difficulties, few scholars who advocate
this explanation find it a very convincing proof of resurrection. They there­
fore often qualify their analyses with statements to the effect that, although
such arguments might not be convincing today, a first-century audience
would have found Jesus' reasoning compelling, a claim often buttressed by
vague appeals to rabbinic methods of exegesis. 32 Rabbi D.M. Cohn-Sherbok,
however, has argued that this type of reasoning does not bear any resemblance
to known Tannaitic exegetical practices, raising the question of whether this
argument would actually have been convincing even in the first century. 33
Turning to the two modes of interpretation that focus on God's nature,
they both suggest that Jesus ultimately grounds his proof in the principle
that God cannot be in relationship with the dead, a principle that finds
expression in 12:27a. Nevertheless, they differ in their analyses of Jesus'
logic. They differ, that is, in their understanding of how 12:27a functions
in the flow of Jesus' argument.
One interpretation regards 12:27a as the second of two parallel prem-
ises: God is 1) God of the patriarchs (12:26) and 2) a god of the living
(12:27a). As Otto Schwankl suggests, the juxtaposition of these two prem-
ises then implies, in typical rabbinic fashion, the desired-but-unstated con-
clusion (that the patriarchs are alive and therefore) that there is a resurrection
of the dead. 34 The strength of this view lies in its recognition that Jesus'
argument must have some type of implied conclusion; 12:27a, after all,
does not state the point that Jesus is purportedly proving, namely, that
God raises the dead. Yet even granting the cultural validity of 12:27a as an
independent premise, 3 ^ this line of reasoning still has a major difficulty: as
the parentheses indicate, the logical combination of these two premises
yields only the result that the patriarchs are alive. 36 How this result might
imply resurrection will be considered below. For now I simply note that
this suggestion awkwardly requires Jesus' argument to have not one but
two implied conclusions. 3
In the second type of interpretive appeal to Gods nature, 12:27a pro­
vides the key to resolving a temporal or philosophical conundrum per­
ceived to be inherent in the citation of Exod. 3:6. Unfortunately, such
proposals often depend on problematic assertions about first-century Jew­
ish thought. 3 8 F. Gerald Downing, however, provides a more nuanced
version. Noting Philo's embarrassment in DeAbr. 50-55 that the immor­
tal God would define himself in Exod. 3:15 in relation to mortal men,
Downing suggests that God's identification of himself as the God of the
patriarchs was perhaps more widely perceived as "rais[ing] awkward and
inescapable questions about mortality." 39 While the platonist Philo could
resolve the immortal/mortal tension simply by allegorizing the three patri­
archs, Jesus instead reasons that God's relatedness to the patriarchs requires
that they still be alive. According to Downing, this particular case can then
be expanded by implication to include all who respond to God, perhaps
even indicating that "relatedness to God constitutes a life that death can­
not disrupt." 40
Downing's proposal for the flow of Jesus' logic seems basically correct;
I will similarly argue that the citation of Exod. 3:6 raises a question about
mortality that Mark 12:27a resolves. I also agree with his conclusion that
Jesus is here describing "a life that death cannot disrupt." Nevertheless,
there seems to be little evidence for grounding these observations in the
perceived philosophical difficulty that arises from relating the immortal to
the mortal. 41 As Downing himself admits, even the evidence from Philo is
ambiguous as to whether or not this relationship represents a true difficulty 42
E Dreyfus offers a more promising approach for understanding Jesus'
reasoning by contextualizing the citation, an approach whose aptness is
suggested by the fact that Jesus himself points to the context ("[in the pas-
sage] about the bush"). Based on a survey of contemporary Jewish litera-
ture, Dreyfus argues that the phrase "God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God
of Jacob" usually emphasizes God's role rather than the role of the patri-
archs. That is to say, the phrase most often signifies, not the God whom the
patriarchs worshipped, but the God who protected them. 43 The literature
typically invokes this name (and its equivalents) as an appeal for similar
protection (e.g., T. Mos. 3.9). Dreyfus finds the revelation of the name to
have this same significance in Exod. 3-4: as God protected the patriarchs,
so he will now protect Israel through the Exodus. 44
How does this understanding of Exod. 3:6 relate to resurrection? Accord-
ing to Dreyfus, Jesus here adds a new dimension to the traditional under-
standing of God's sovereign protection by implying that for God to allow
his people to die—even after a long life—would make a mockery of his
claim to protect. God's protection must therefore ultimately entail resur-
rection. 45 Dreyfus then suggests that Jesus' conclusion represents the natu-
ral outworking for the individual of God's covenantal promises to restore
the nation of Israel (e.g., Ezek. 16:60; 37:1-28; Lev. 26:42; Ps. 106:45). 46
While Janzen applauds Dreyfus s sensitivity to the original Exodus con-
text of the citation, he suggests that the Markan context of the citation
further sharpens our understanding of Jesus' argument: "Jesus is not just
invoking in a general way the tradition of God's protection and power; he
is countering [the Sadducees'] story [of hopeless sterility and death] with a
reminder of the ancestors' story " 4 ~ For Janzen, the reference to God as the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob recalls the repeated bouts of sterility in
the patriarchal families and, more importantly, God's subsequent miracu-
lous provision of heirs. Similarly, in the Exodus story from which the cita-
tion comes, God arises to preserve his now-numerous people miraculously
from a new "sterility" imposed by the murderous decrees of Pharaoh. In
this reading, then, Jesus argues for resurrection by taking this foundational
Jewish tradition of God as the one who overcomes sterility and death and
applying it to the fate of the individual after death. 48
Dreyfus and Janzen both helpfully advance the discussion by pointing to
the interpretive significance of the OT and N T contexts. Yet both also con-
clude that Jesus' argument ultimately hinges on the principle of situational
analogy, a form of argument that, by its very nature, cannot be conclusive.
Indeed, Dreyfus and Janzen both admit that the inferences they attribute to
Jesus stand in some tension with the very biblical texts that, in their view,
gave rise to those inferences in the first place. For Dreyfus, Jesus' grounding
of resurrection in God's saving power goes beyond the Pentateuchal por-
trayal of God's salvation as resulting simply in a long, fulfilled life. 49 For Jan-
zen, God's character as the one who overcomes sterility leads Jesus to infer
resurrection in spite of the fact that the levirate marriage law itself essentially
attests to the reality that God does not always overcome even sterility D °
While it is true that ways can be found to resolve these tensions—e.g.,
Janzen notes that "[retrospectively," the levirate marriage law could be
viewed as a promissory sign of God's ultimate plan to overcome sterility
and death 51 —it remains to be seen how Jesus could have expected the Sad-
ducees to draw the correct analogies and inferences from these texts. To
put the matter another way, why does Jesus rebuke them so harshly if his
own argument is less than decisive?
It could, of course, be argued that the desire for a reasoned proof unjustly
imposes modern concerns onto an ancient text. Richard Hays, e.g., sug-
gests that Jesus offers here not so much a logical proof as a reminder of
God's power designed to serve as "a stimulus to the theological imagina-
tion." 52 It is always possible, too, that Jesus' criticism is simply unjustified, or
that his critique depends on some unmentioned factor such as his knowl­
edge of the Sadducees' hardened hearts or the need for the Spirit's guidance
in interpretation. Such proposals, however, should only come into consid­
eration if a more logical explanation of Jesus' argument cannot be dis-
3
cerned.^ 1 suggest that paying greater attention to the idea of covenant in
Jesus' argument both makes sense of his critique of the Sadducees and
reveals his citation of Exod. 3:6 to be a reasoned proof of resurrection—a
proof, that is, as long as one grants God the power to resurrect the dead.
As Dreyfus and Janzen suggest, the key to understanding Jesus' proof seems
to lie in the O T and N T contexts of the Exodus citation. In its original
context, Exod. 3:6 introduces God's plan to deliver his people from their
slavery in Egypt through Moses and the Exodus. Significantly, this burning
bush episode is immediately preceded by the observation that God heard the
groaning of his people and "remembered his covenant with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob" (Exod. 2:24). By invoking the three names again in 3:6, the text
indicates that the Exodus to which God is calling Moses arises out of God's
faithfulness to his covenantal obligations to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
It is at this point that the N T context becomes significant. In the discus­
sion of the first part of Jesus' response (12:25) above, I argued that Jesus
criticizes the Sadducees for not inferring from the levirate marriage law
that death ends a marriage covenant. D4 The same principle appears to ground
this segment of his response, only in reverse. That is to say, if the death of a
covenantal party effectively annuls the covenant, then the fact that the Exodus
represents an act of God's faithfulness to his covenant with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob must imply that the three patriarchs are in some sense still alive to
God. Otherwise their deaths would have annulled the covenant.^ Just to
be clear, it is not God's covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob that pre-
serves their lives beyond physical death but their life beyond physical death
that preserves the covenant. Jesus draws this implied conclusion: "He is
not a god of dead people but of living" (12:27a). Luke makes the reasoning
even more explicit by adding "for all live to him" (20:38). 56 With respect
to God, human life extends beyond the death of the physical body. 5 "
This argument, of course, only proves some kind of post-mortem existence,
not resurrection. The proof therefore requires the presence of an implied
conclusion, as Schwankl correctly observes. 58 In other words, the "conclu-
sion" given in 12:27a functions only as a preliminary conclusion, a pre-
liminary conclusion that then implies resurrection so clearly that, as often
occurs in the rabbinic literature, the remainder of the argument goes
unstated. How r does the rest of the argument go?
Interpreters used to justify the jump from immortality to resurrection
by appealing to the unity of human nature. H.B. Swete, for instance, argues
that "God would not leave men with whom He maintained relations in an
imperfect condition." 59 The continuing presence of these immortal souls
apart from their physical bodies undermines this suggestion. Alternatively,
N.T. Wright contends that the patriarchs' immortality necessarily implies
a general resurrection because the two main Jewish understandings of the
afterlife were 1) the Pharisaic, two-stage view in which an intermediate
state was followed by bodily resurrection and 2) the Sadducean, no-stage
view in which physical death marked the end of a person. Proving the
existence of an interim state would therefore prove the Pharisaic two-stage
view. 60 More promising because it does not require the prior assumption of
a Pharisaic view of the afterlife is E. Earle Ellis's suggestion that "God's
[covenantal] relationship to the dead presupposes that the relationship will
be actualized by their deliverance from Sheol." 61 Although Ellis leaves his
suggestion at this fairly vague level, the basic thrust seems correct.
I propose that Jesus' argument runs as follows. Because it is based on
God's faithfulness to his covenant with the patriarchs, the Exodus out of
Egypt proves that the patriarchs are in some sense still alive to God, the
conclusion drawn in 12:27a. But if they are still alive, then God remains
obligated to fulfill all of his covenantal promises, one of which is to give
the land of Canaan as an everlasting possession to the patriarchs (e.g.,
Gen. 17:8; Exod. 6:4; Num. 14:23; Deut. 11:21) and their descendants. 62
Indeed, the Exodus context of the verse that Jesus cites evokes this very
promise: almost immediately after revealing himself as the God of Abra-
ham, Isaac, and Jacob, Yahweh goes on to identify the giving of this prom-
ised land as part of the motivation for the Exodus itself (Exod. 3:8, 17; cf.
Gen. 15:13-16). For the patriarchs to receive the land personally as an
everlasting possession, however, would presumably require their eventual
resurrection. 63
The purportedly Tannaitic proofs of resurrection in San. 90b provide
parallels to this suggested logic: 64
It has been taught: R. Simai said: Whence do we learn resurrection from the Torah?—
From the verse, And I also have established my covenant with them, [sc. the Patriarchs]
to give them the land of Canaan [Exod 6:4]: '[to give] you' is not said, but '[to give]
them' [personally] ; thus resurrection is proved from the Torah
Sectarians [minim] asked Rabban Gamaliel: Whence do we know that the Holy One,
blessed be He, will resurrect the dead?... [Rabban Gamaliel did not satisfy them] until
he quoted this verse, which theLordsware unto your fathers to give to them [Deut 11:21];
not to you, but to them is said; hence resurrection is derived from the Torah. 6 "
Although little is known of R. Simai, Rabban Gamaliel was a prominent
rabbi who lived at the end of the first century. 66 According to Cohn-Sherbok,
his reasoning here exemplifies Hillel's seventh exegetical principle, "the expla-
nation derived from the context." 6 Of course, the attribution of this proof
to Gamaliel could be apocryphal. Even if the attribution represents a later
development, however, the type of reasoning nevertheless seems consistent
with first-century Jewish exegetical practices. 68 The above interpretation of
Jesus' argument thus places him squarely in his first-century context.
I argued above that the Sadducees' basic scenario of a woman who is
unable to bear children despite having seven lawful husbands essentially
attacks resurrection on two fronts since resurrection is 1) more difficult
than natural childbearing and 2) not prescribed in the Torah. Jesus responds by
referring to God's fulfillment of his covenantal obligations in the Exodus
(Exod. 3:6). By alluding to this event, he implies that the Torah does pre-
scribe resurrection: 69 while God never promises that he will provide chil-
dren through the levirate marriage law, he does promise to give the land of
Canaan to the patriarchs and their descendants. This promise saw an initial
fulfillment in the Exodus out of Egypt; its complete fulfillment will require
the eventual resurrection of the patriarchs and their (deceased) descendants.
If the Torah thus establishes resurrection as a component of God's
intended plan, then the Sadducees' critique effectively amounts to little
more than a questioning of God's power. The Exodus story itself, however,
is the story of God's miraculous ability to overcome the seemingly insur-
mountable obstacles that threaten the fulfillment of his promises. As the
Lord explains in Exod. 6:6-8,
I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians... and I will redeem you
with an outstretched arm and with great judgments. And I will take you for my people,
and I will be your God, and you will know that I am the Lord your God who brought
you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians. And I will bring you into the land
that I swore to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and I will give it to you as a posses-
sion. I am the Lord.
Israel's Exodus out of Egypt demonstrates the lengths to which God is
both able and willing to go in order to fulfill his covenantal promises. The
God who sustains life beyond physical death, the God who delivered his
people from the mighty Pharaoh through miraculous judgments and pro-
vision, this God is surely capable of resurrecting the dead. Tlie Sadducees
are thus mistaken because they do not understand God's power.
I began this examination of Mark 12:18-27 by arguing that the Sadducees'
proposed scenario functions as a trap. On a surface level, it points to a
seeming conflict between the scriptural levirate marriage law and a belief
in resurrection. On a deeper level, however, the very scenario itself, a sce-
nario in which a woman and her multiple husbands are unable to "raise
up" children despite the provisions of the Torah, represents an implicit
denial of the more difficult "raising up" of resurrection. Any attempt to
resolve the logistical difficulties of the presenting problem would presum-
ably involve an acceptance of the scenario itself and, thus, its implicit cri-
tique of resurrection.
Jesus, however, manages to refute the Sadducees' critiques while also
avoiding their trap. He first demonstrates that their perceived conflict
between resurrection and the levirate marriage law rests on the Sadducees'
misunderstanding of the very scripture that they cite: since the levirate
marriage law requires that death annuls the covenantal bond of marriage,
none of the woman's prior marital relationships would continue into the
resurrected state. Jesus then addresses the implied critique, proving resur-
rection through a citation of Exod. 3:6. If, as he has just demonstrated,
death annuls a covenantal bond, then the fact that God initiates the Exo-
dus out of Egypt on the basis of his covenant with the patriarchs must
imply that they are still alive to God. In fact, the Exodus story itself dem-
onstrates God's desire and power to fulfill his promise to give the land of
Canaan to the patriarchs and their descendants, a promise whose fulfillment
will ultimately require resurrection. The Sadducees have therefore also mis-
understood God's power.
Not only does this reading interpret Jesus' answer as a coherent whole that
makes logical sense in both the first-century and modern contexts, it also
reveals a response that coheres quite well with the presentation of resurrec­
tion in other N T texts. I noted at the beginning of this article that current
interpretations of Mark 12:18-27 often yield little if any theological reso­
nance with the rest of the NT. On the one hand, the suggestion that Jesus
here defines resurrection in terms of immortality renders his logic incom­
patible with texts such as 1 Cor. 15:35-41 that clearly envision a bodily
resurrection. On the other hand, the tendency for scholars to view Jesus as
arguing from the fact of the patriarchs' continuing existence rather than
the reason for their continuing existence renders his logic largely irrelevant
once believers could point to Jesus' own resurrection. The interpretation
offered in this article, in contrast, effectively resolves the theological dis­
sonance that both of these readings create.
First, as I argued above, Jesus' reasoning in Mark 12:24-27 does point
to the future bodily resurrection of the patriarchs. The passage does not, of
course, argue that resurrection is bodily, but such an argument is unneces­
sary since it represents the underlying assumption inherent both in the
language of "resurrection" and in the Sadducees' scenario. Indeed, my sug­
gested analysis of Jesus' logic requires that "rising from among the dead"
(εκ νεκρών άναστώσιν, 12:25) refers to bodily resurrection: if the patri­
archs' current non-corporeal existence represents a resurrected rather than
an interim state, then they would presumably have already undergone a
death sufficient to annul God's covenant, and Jesus' whole argument
would falter.
The problem is that resurrection requires a death, but death annuls a
covenant. To argue for resurrection based on God's covenantal faithfulness
therefore requires a kind of preliminary death, a death sufficient to experi­
ence resurrection, yet not so complete as to annul the covenant. In other
words, Jesus' argument requires a person's continued existence in a non-
corporeal interim state after physical death. The assumption of such an
interim state then enables the following distinction: whereas physical
death suffices to annul covenants (such as marriages) between physical
beings, it cannot annul covenants with God since all people—not just the
patriarchs—continue living with respect to God even after physical death
(cf. Luke 20:38). "Resurrection" must therefore refer, as it always does, to
the restoration of an embodied state.
Second, the above analysis of Jesus' response suggests that he does base
his proof of resurrection on the reason for—and not just the fact of—the
patriarchs' impending resurrection. That is to say, he grounds his resurrec-
tion belief in God's faithfulness to the covenant with the patriarchs. Far
from being irrelevant, this principle represents a fundamental tenet of N T
theology. In Gal. 3:15-18, for instance, Paul identifies God's covenant with
Abraham and his "seed" as the reason for Jesus' receiving of the promised
inheritance, an inheritance that his resurrection presumably indicates and
enables (cf. Luke 1:55, 72-73; Acts 3:25-26; 7:2-53). Paul then goes on to
state that his readers' own hope rests in their status as heirs of Abraham
through Christ (3:29; cf. Heb. 2:16). The debates with Jewish leaders
recorded in the N T concerning who constitutes a true heir of Abraham
and his covenant (e.g., Matt. 3:7-10 / Luke 3:7-9; John 8:39-40; cf. Rom. 4)
similarly attest to the theological importance of this principle.
This brief analysis does not exhaust the theological implications of this
passage and their resonances within the rest of the NT. ° For now, howe\^er,
it must suffice simply to note that, in the reading proposed by this article,
not only does Jesus refer to a bodily resurrection, but he also grounds his
proof in the same theological understanding that emerges in the appeals to
Jesus' own resurrection made by the early church. This reading of the logic
in Mark 12:26-27a thus achieves coherence with the other N T portrayals
of resurrection at precisely those points where it might be expected, points
where more traditional interpretations have tended to see dissonance.