This essay deals with the instructions on money in 1 Timothy 6, culminat-
ing in 1 Tim 6:17-19, the concluding instruction in 1 Timothy. Although
the passage is problematic in a number of ways, treatment of it in its
own right has been relatively slim, attention rather being concentrated on
how it relates to the rest of chapter 6. While the question of literary rela-
tionship is important and will receive some attention, I wish to explore
more extensively than has been done the traditions used in this final exhor-
tation, instruction to the wealthy in the church.
Studies of the moral teaching of the Pastoral Epistles (henceforth PE)
have tended to concentrate on the influence of popular philosophers on
the author. In a number of studies I have attempted to demonstrate that an
awareness of philosophical traditions available to the author sheds light on
these letters. The philosophy in view is usually Stoicism, but recently Cyn-
icism has also come under consideration. 2 In this article I wish to cast the
net more widely, to include other evidence of popular moral teaching of
the day in addition to the philosophical, to provide a broader context
within which to situate the Pastorals, and more narrowly, the discussion of
wealth in 1 Tim 6.
Such a richer description of the moral landscape permits a more nuanced
view of the relationship of the PE to their environment than simply one of
derivation or influence. At the very least, it makes one aware of the variety
of opinions that were held about wealth. A brief canvass of the types of
materials used by the PE in their moral teaching will provide perspective
for my investigation.
The Pastoral Epistles are deeply indebted to hellenistic moral philosophers
in matters of style, ethics and even theology. 3 This is true of the discussion
in chapter 5, where intergenerational relationships are the issue. 4 It is also
true of the discussion in chapter 6, as will be demonstrated. But before
proceeding to that chapter, a few comments on what is meant by popular
moral philosophy are in order.
To speak of "popular philosophers" or "popular philosophy" does not
imply that the philosophers in view or the teaching associated with them
was uniformly liked or approved. The diversity in self-perception, motiva-
tion and style of speech and demeanor among these philosophers shows
that the situation was more complex. This appears, for example, in the way
Lucian of Samosata lampoons some philosophers in satires like The Run-
aways and Philosophies for Sale on the one hand, and his respectful por-
trayal of ideal figures in Demonaxzna Nigrinus on the other. The differences
emerge equally clearly from within the enterprise, as Dio Chrysostom
makes clear in autobiographical comments, describing how it came about
that he adopted the philosophical way of life and how he was sometimes
accepted and at other times rejected by his audiences. Dio spoke mostly in
public, accessible to large crowds of listeners, while other philosophers
spoke in classrooms, gymnasia and salons of the rich, thus also physically
accessible in more defined settings. 5
The term "popular" is serviceable to apply to philosophers whose teach-
ings were intellectually accessible as well to a wide swath of society. Their
philosophy was not conceptually complex or technical by way of formal
argumentation; indeed, they were not interested in sustained or systematic
exposition in or for itself. 6 They aimed at the moral formation of people,
to whom they advanced the proposition that human beings can live mor-
ally and virtuously only if they live rationally, and the rational life, they
held, was the province of philosophy in the sense that it made that life pos-
sible and provided details as to what it should be. 7
The educational level presumed is that of adolescent males, although a
philosopher like Musonius Rufus insisted that young women too should
study philosophy. 8 The philosophers' interest was in ethics, the intellectual
underpinning of which was to a considerable degree provided by Stoicism,
whose influence was widespread. It is found, for instance, in the orations
of the well-educated sophist, Maximus of Tyre, whose intellectual level has
recently been described aptly as that of "philosophy made easy." 9
But, to judge from Lucians satires, philosophic pretenders from the
lower classes would pick up a philosophic term here and there to spice up
their harangues as they joined the ranks of the street preachers, who were
mostly Cynic. 10
It is difficult to determine how far the influence of moral philosophy
extended beyond the circles who either explicitly claimed to be philosophical
or appealed to philosophical traditions. Adolf Deissmann a century ago
thought that inscriptions more accurately represented popular thinking
than philosophical texts. 11 Later, Martin Dibelius identified many simi-
larities between honorary inscriptions and popular morality, but cautiously
stipulated that the relationship had not been explained thoroughly. 12 In
recent years, there has been renewed interest in utilizing inscriptions to
illuminate the New Testament in general, 13 and study of the PE has con-
tinued to be enriched by bringing them into the conversation. 14 But deter-
mining the value of inscriptions, whether honorific or on tombstones, has
to come to terms with certain facts.
To begin with, epigraphic reference to philosophers is very slight, 15 as is
epigraphic philosophical propaganda. 16 Coming at the matter from the
philosophers' side, we do know that for a philosopher like Plutarch, "epig-
raphy can serve as a measure of character and great deeds," 17 and the vir-
tues celebrated in honorific inscriptions were also held to be virtues by
moral philosophers. 18 Furthermore, as Teresa Morgan holds, although
tombstones or dedications that exhibit ethical vocabulary were likely to
have been erected by wealthy families, and "the range and relative fre-
quency of the virtues enumerated in first- and second-century epitaphs"
has not been studied as a whole by anyone, the indications that emerge
from Latimore's study "suggest that virtues celebrated on epitaphs are, on
the whole, also those found in popular sayings and stories." 19 Elizabeth
Forbis has a similar judgment about the honorific inscriptions she has
studied: "With very few exceptions... the words chosen to illustrate virtu-
ous behavior in these honorary texts belong to the standard Latin vocabu-
lary for virtue." 20
It is true that inscriptions must be used with the greatest care in con-
structing demographic models, 21 but they are a useful bit of evidence when
read in conjunction with literary sources. 22 These writings have recently
been called aristocratic, which is taken to mean that they are of little value
as descriptions of social realities, pride of place rather belonging to inscrip-
tions. 23 I do not share this judgment, which stands the matter on its head.
The two sources should be regarded as complementary, the literary more
extensive and clearly sharing an affinity with the Pastoral Epistles, namely
the aim of effecting moral behavior. We shall return to this matter below,
when discussing the use of wealth.
Teresa Morgan has described popular morality in the early Roman Empire
on the basis of proverbs, gnomes, exemplary stories and fables, and raised
the question of the relationship between popular morality and "high phi-
losophy." Her sources for the latter are Seneca, Plutarch, Maximus of Tyre
and Epictetus as she combines the two. 24 She concludes that the philoso-
phers used popular material to make a case, not simply to illustrate an
argument, and that "there is more evidence that high philosophy drew its
questions, if not its answers, from popular morality." But, she concludes,
they are "two streams of culture, ultimately rising from many of the same
sources. ^
The matter looks slightly different when the interest is in moral instruc-
tion, which is our concern in this essay, rather than theoretical argument.
One of the types of material Morgan examines is the proverb. After dealing
with philosophers' attempts to define what a proverb is, she is led to the
broad statement, "The essential features of proverbs, in the authors I have
quoted, seem to be that they are traditional, popular, anonymous and
instructive." 26 Proverbs, socially "low in origin," are self-evidently true, and
represent common wisdom. 27 These features made proverbs a natural part
of the moral philosophers rhetorical repertoire, particularly in paraenesis.
In his discussion of that part of philosophy that the Greeks call parae-
netic {paraeneticeri) and the Romans call preceptorial {praeceptivam), Sen­
eca (Ep. 95.1) makes the case that precepts require no proofs when they are
used, for they are self-evidently true and compelling, whether couched in
prose or poetry, or in proverbs. Seneca maintains that the capacity to do
what is honorable is within us, just waiting to be stimulated by advice
{admonitio), a proverb or precept sufficing to do that {Ep. 94.27-29, 43,
47, illustrating his point by quoting a number of proverbs). Two things
combine to make them irrefutable: their intrinsic, self-evident rightness,
and the acknowledgment by people generally that they contain wisdom.
This is also a major feature of paraenesis. 28
The author of the Pastoral Epistles uses proverbs, understood in the way
described by Morgan, in all three letters, which are, for the most part,
paraenetic. See, for example, the following: 1 Tim 4:8, "physical training is
beneficial for a few things, but godliness (ευσέβεια) is beneficial for all
things," is sometimes thought to be proverbial, originating in Stoic phi­
losophy, where philosophy was praised. Christians substituted ευσέβεια
for philosophy 2 9 First Timothy 5:18, "Do not muzzle an ox while he is
threshing," although a citation of Scripture (Deut 25:4), is proverbial in
nature. And "The workman is worthy of his wage," in the same passage,
although identified as Scripture, is in fact a word of Jesus derived from the
Synoptic tradition and is also a proverb. 30
Titus 1:12, "Liars ever, men of Crete, nasty brutes that live to eat," is a
proverb, 31 as is Titus 1:15, "all things are pure to the pure." 3 2 Sometimes
the oxymoron in 2 Tim 4:2, "in season and out of season," is referred to as
proverbial, 33 but it is in fact derived from the rhetoric of psychagogy. 34
There has been a tendency to identify too freely as proverbial material that
seems to ill fit their context and looks to be traditional, 35 which may be due
partly to a lack of appreciation of the abruptness of the style of exhortation
and partly to the convenient slipperiness of defining a proverb.
It is noteworthy that the proverbs in 1 Tim 5:18, as does the Greek
proverb, with minor changes, attributed to Jesus in Acts 20:38, "It is more
blessed to give than to receive," also deals with financial matters. And the
command in 2 Thess 3:10, "If someone does not want to work, let him not
eat," with good reason sounded to Deissmann like "a bit of good old work­
shop morality." 36 What these passages have in common, other than their
proverbial character, is that they deal with financial remuneration for work
performed, in two cases, manual labor (Acts 20:38; 2 Thess 3:10). In
1 Tim 5:18 the proverbial statement also derives from the working class,
but the application is to financial support of those who labor in the church's
service. 37
The frequency with which proverbs and similar material appear in the PE
is worth noting in light of ancient epistolary theory about the appropriate
style of a letter. Gregory of Nazianzus, commenting on charm (χάρις), says
This we should preserve if, on the one hand, we avoided writing with complete aridity,
gracelessness and lack of embellishment, in the unadorned and untrimmed style, as it
is called, which allows for no pithy sayings (γνωμών), proverbs (προιμιών) or apo­
phthegms (αποφθεγμάτων) nor for witticism or enigmas which sweeten discourse. On
the other hand we should not make undue use of these devices. Not to use them at all
is boorish, to use them too much is cloying. (Ep. 51.5; trans. Malherbe, Ancient Epis­
tolary Theorists, 61)
And Demetrius says about ornament (κάλλος) that a letter may have it
in the shape of friendly bits of kindly advice (φιλικαι φιλοφρονήσεις) mixed with a
few good proverbs (παροιμίαι). This last is the only philosophy admissible in it-the
proverb being the wisdom of the people, the wisdom of the world. But the man who
utters sententious maxims (γνωμολογών) and exhortations (προτρεπόμενος) seems to
be no longer talking familiarly in a letter but to be speaking ex cathedra. {De elocutione
38
232; trans. W.R. Roberts, LCL; repr. Malherbe, Ancient Epistolary Theorists, 19)
Gregory and Demetrius are writing about friendly letters, 39 in which an
abundance of gnomes, apophthegms, protrepses, chreiai and the like are
not appropriate. Proverbs belong to these popular philosophical means of
moral instruction. 40 The Pastoral Epistles are not "friendly letters," but par­
take of the nature of philosophical letters, in which proverbs or proverbial
wisdom are at home.
Commentators generally agree that there is so close a relationship between
1 Tim 6:17-19 and 1:3-20 that they form an inclusio to the whole letter. 41
Jukka Thurén, who has been most influential in arguing for this view, drew
attention to the warnings against false teachers in both sections (1:5-6 and
6:20-21), and claimed that the entire letter is to be seen as a warning against
false teachers and their sins, and the commendations of true doctrine. 42
There is less agreement on the literary structure of 6:2b-21. How the five
passages that comprise this section (w. 2b-5; 6-10; 11-16; 17-19; 20-21)
relate to each other is not immediately obvious, nor has agreement been
reached on whether there is one theme that pervades the section, and if so,
what it is. It has been argued, for example, that the main theme is the
opposition to heretics who make commerce of religion, 43 or that the theme
is the correct or wrong attitude toward money, 44 or that the section is a
conglomeration of material, assembled haphazardly 45 or in the syntacti-
cally loose style of paraenesis. 46 It has also been maintained, on the con-
trary, that the structure of the section is well thought out formally and
theologically, and that it is the result of a long history of reflection and
repetition. 47
It is not necessary for my present purpose to resolve these issues in detail.
It will suffice at the moment to claim in anticipation that the paraenetic
nature of w. 2b-21 must be taken more seriously. When that is done, it
will be observed that there is greater coherence in the section than is usu-
ally supposed. To do that requires a closer look at the context of w. 17-19.
The literary context of 6:17-19 consists not only of 6:2b-21, which comes
in for discussion most often, but also includes chapter 5 and 6:1-2b. The
author thinks of this latter section as teaching and exhortation: ταΰτα
δίδασκε καί παρακαλεί (6:2b), the ταΰτα pointing backwards, to 5:1,
παρακαλεί. This is in keeping with his use of ταΰτα in paraenetic state­
ments to summarize advice that precedes, and to mark a transition, as it
does here. 48
This block of text for the most part has three groups within the church
in view and instructs them about the proper use of money. Directions are
given about how the church should honor old women, particularly widows
(5:3-16) and old men (5:17-19) by supporting them financially, 49 Chris­
tian slaves are similarly commanded to honor their own masters, especially
if they are believing brethren, for then the recipients of the slaves' benefac­
tion are beloved believers. 50
Between the directions to the church (5:3-19) and the slaves, the author
addresses Timothy directly (v. 20-23), solemnly adjuring him to guard the
instruction just given (again the "paraenetic" ταΰτα, v. 21), and urging
him to behavior that does not explicitly relate to what precedes. 51
Chapter 6 largely deals with what should be the church's attitude toward
money and its use. The discussion is enclosed by two warnings against the
heretics (w. 3, 20-21) and commands to Timothy to teach and guard tra­
dition (w. 2b, 20). Between these two brackets are instructions to the
church in general on ευσέβεια (w. 3-5) and αυτάρκεια (w. 6-10) as they
pertain to money, a charge to Timothy personally (w. 11-16), and instruc­
tion to the rich on how to use their wealth (w. 17-19).
Discussion of a new issue is marked by the transitional ταΰτα δίδασκε και
παρακαλεί in v. 2b.
Formally, w. 3-5 is an inclusio in which a correct understanding of
ευσέβεια (v. 3) is contrasted with an erroneous one (v. 5). The long enclosed
sentence is polemical, directed against the conceit that commerce can
be made of ευσέβεια, a term important in the PE and particularly so in
1 Timothy. 52 Important for our present purpose is that ευσέβεια is related
to the correct teaching, which is not heeded by the heretics (v. 3). That
teaching is described as the sound or healthy words of our Lord Jesus
Christ (ύγιαίνουσιν λόγοις τοις του κυρίου Τησοΰ Χρίστου), the genitive
being objective, referring to the sound teaching about Jesus. The teaching
is further explained to be the teaching that accords with godliness (καί τχ\
κατ' εύσέβειαν διδασκαλία). The person who is not devoted to this teach­
ing is cognitively deficient: he is demented (τετύφωται), understands noth­
ing (μηδέν επισταμένος), but is ill, having a morbid craving for disputes
and verbal battles (άλλα νοσών περί ζητήσεις καί λογομαχίας) from which
issue the vices of envy, strife, slander, evil suspicions, in sum, the frictional
wranglings of people corrupt in mind (διεφθαρμένων ανθρώπων τον νουν)
and deprived of the truth, supposing that godliness is a means to financial
gain (πορισμός).
This language is derived from contemporary criticisms of philosophers
who were accused of teaching out of ignoble motives. That some unscru­
pulous individuals taught for financial gain was so common a charge that
some serious philosophers rejected financial aid. The accusation appears
in Titus 1:11, where the teachers of error are charged with teaching αισχρού
κέρδους χάριν. The author has no qualms about a Christian preacher
receiving financial support; in 1 Tim 5:17-18 he thinks the practice is so
self-evidently correct that mere statements of proverbial character provide
sufficient support for it. What offends in Titus 1:11 is that, like charlatan
philosophers, the purpose of teaching is to make money.
Philosophers, too, were concerned about how to secure a livelihood.
The term πορισμός (or πόρος) itself was neutral; the issue was the appropri­
ateness of the endeavor to support oneself 54 First Timothy 6:3-5 is sharper
in its criticism of the heretics than Titus 1:11, charging that they demand
financial support, not simply because they are greedy, but because they
think their πορισμός is a matter of ευσέβεια. This criticism is different also
in another way, namely, that it is the intellectual equipment of the teachers
of error that leads them to the erroneous perception that ευσέβεια justifies
their profiteering. Noteworthy about this polemic is the medical terminol­
ogy used to describe the intellectual incapacity of the errorists that is
responsible for their vices detailed in the list in v. 4. The PE are shot through
with terms describing the heretics as mentally and morally diseased. 55 Here
we are in the midst of popular moral philosophical descriptions of the
human condition. 56
The description of passions and vices as diseases had a long history and
was widespread. The soul, it was said, could be in a state of war, with its
passions and diseases prevailing over its healthy, rational principles (τους
υγιαίνοντας λόγους). The soul that is corrupt (ψυχή διεφθαρμένη) is so
because of ignorance, depravity, insolence, jealousy, grief and countless
desires.
Of interest is a comment by Plutarch {Cupid, divit. 524C-E) about the
illness of money-grubbers (των ποριζόντων). The person
who has more than enough and yet hungers (όρεγόμενον) for more will find no rem­
edy in gold or silver or horse and sheep and cattle, but in casting out the source of
mischief and being purged. For his ailment is not poverty, but insatiability and avarice,
arising from the presence in him of a false and unrelenting judgment (κρίσιν φαύλην
και άλόγιστον); and unless someone removes this, like a tapeworm, from his mind,
he will never cease to need superfluities-that is, to want what he does not need, (trans.
RH. de Lacy & B. Einarson, LCL)
The person who is absorbed with getting money (τω πορισμω προστετηκότα)
has a mental disorder (ψυχή νόσος). 58
The remedy for this malady is the philosopher s psychagogic treatment,
by which he soothes the inflammation of the soul and cures it of vices by
means of education and reason, as he adapts his ministrations in timely
fashion to the varying conditions of the moral patient. 59
Not all philosophers shared this relatively optimistic view of the human
condition. The letters falsely attributed to Diogenes the Cynic, for exam­
ple, are unrelenting in their criticism of their assumed audience. In a par­
ody of the epistolary greeting (ύγιαίνειν, "good health to you!"), 60 Ep. 28
opens with οίμώζειν ("a plague on you!"), and from there on things go
downwards (cf. the closing, 28.8, οίμώζειν λέγω). The putative readers are
accused of knowing nothing, suffering great delusion (τΰφον), never being
at peace, envying each other, deciding nothing by good reason (ύγιει
λόγφ): "You know nothing... but, being made a mockery of by your igno­
rance and senselessness you have become perverted" (28.2). In Ep. 29.5,
they are told, "But you are in an advanced state of corruption (διαφθορά).
Therefore, cutting, cautery and medication must be employed." The sick­
ness has gripped them for so long and so thoroughly that they no longer
see the extent of their evil (19.4). They are so far gone that instead of
selecting teachers who would purge them, they
have found the kind of people who would defile and corrupt (διαλυμαίνοντο και
διαφθείροιεν) you. For they are not looking for any good they might do you, but
rather how they might get a meal, and they are searching for whatever gain they might
make (κερδανοΰσι). They remove none of your present troubles but make off with
some of your possessions and, in addition, corrupt the standards of your household.
(29.3)
The PE adopt this polemical tradition to describe the false teachers. Like
the harsh Cynic, they hold out no prospect for improvement or effective
psychagogy. Corrupt in mind, the heretics' άνοια will be visible to all, they
will make no moral progress (ου προκόψουσιν επί πλειον), but will, ironi­
cally, only "make progress" to a worse condition (προκόψουσιν επί χείρον)
(2 Tim 3:8-9, 13; cf. 2:16). 61 The Pastorals likewise stress the subversion of
households by these moneygrubbers (Titus 1:11; cf. 2 Tim 3:6-7).
The philosophical traditions are used exclusively polemically. Despite the
charge that the heretics reject the "sound words" and the "teaching that
accords with godliness," we are not told anything here about the content
of the orthodox teaching or of any heterodox teaching they may have held
to (contrast 1 Tim 4:1-3; 2 Tim 2:18). Our author limits himself to stress­
ing, vituperatively, the character defects of the persons he opposes, which
are detailed in the vice list (v. 4) and the three participles which describe
them in an apparently logical order: corrupt (διεφθαρμένων) in mind,
(therefore) deprived (έπεστερημένων) of the truth, (therefore) suppose
(νομιζόντων) that godliness is an occasion for personal financial gain.
The function of these insults is to heighten the contrast between the
morally degraded people who make money by their preaching and the
behavior he inculcates in w. 6-10. At issue is, in the first place, not doc­
trine, but moral living; the author is a moralist, not primarily a heresiolo-
gist. The comments on the heretics serve as a foil for the positive moral
instruction that follows in w. 6-10, as they do in 1 Tim 4:1-7, 8-10 and
Titus 1:10-16, 2:1-10.
Having so vigorously rejected the heretics' connection of πορισμός and
ευσέβεια, the author goes on to make a contrasting claim which modifies
the two: "But there is great profit in godliness when it is accompanied by
self-sufficiency (εστίν δε πορισμός μέγας ή ευσέβεια μετά αυτάρκειας)"
(v. 6). 62 The emphatic claim (note the position of εστίν) adds μέγας to
πορισμός and μετά αυτάρκειας to ευσέβεια. 63 One might have expected
that, having attributed the erroneous view to mental incompetence and
deprivation of the truth, appeal would be made to an authoritative source
for the claim made about self-sufficiency. Or, reference could be made to
God s or Christs empowerment to live self-sufficiently, as Paul does in
2 Cor 9:8 and Phil 4:11. But the temptation should be resisted to interpret
1 Tim 6:6 in light of those passages, especially of Phil 4:11, where Paul is
thought to have "'turned the tables' on the Stoics by declaring that genuine
autarkeia is not insufficiency but CÁmí-sufficiency." 64 There is nothing
like that in 1 Tim 6:6. We have to do with a writer in the tradition of the
moralists who approaches the subject in quite another manner.
The style and content of the contrast are characteristically paraenetic.
The contrast is the second member of an antithesis (δε), which is a major
feature in paraenesis, where the stress is on the second member, as it is
here. The first, negative member, serves to highlight the positive statement,
65
which is of major interest. The author is mostly interested in self-
sufficiency, as is indicated by αυτάρκεια and άρκεσθησόμεθα which enclose
the contrasting sentence (v. 8). When godliness is accompanied or quali­
fied by self-sufficiency it issues in great profit. It is natural that self-suffi­
ciency comes up in a discussion of ones means of livelihood as it does also
in Musonius Rufus' discussion of the philosopher s means of livelihood,
although the word αυτάρκεια does not occur there (Musonius Rufus,
Fr. 11 [59, 2-12 Hense]). Αυτάρκεια was a favorite virtue among philoso­
phers, particularly among Stoics and Cynics, but also among Epicureans. 66
It has been thought that there is nothing in w. 6-8 that could not have
been said by a Cynic or Stoic, or that our author speaks of the virtue in
much the same way that they did. 67 A brief survey that includes the Epicu­
reans will provide texture to the philosophical context of the Pastorals.
Stoics and Cynics had similar but not identical views of self-sufficiency.
Stoics held that the wise man freed himself from those things both within
and without that hindered him from attaining happiness and true freedom.
He did this by concentrating on those things which were within his control.
He withdraws into himself and with clarity of mind perceives the divine, universal law,
which, when all is said and done, he cannot alter. He gives it his assent and lets fate do
with him what it will. In this way, however, he possesses inner freedom and rejoices in
the magnificent spectacle of the divine government of the world. 68
The Stoics view of self-sufficiency was inextricably part of the Stoic intel­
lectual enterprise. One could expect that a writer with a Stoic orientation
would in 1 Tim 6 have contrasted the erroneous view of godliness held by
the intellectually wanting heretics to a correct, rational view of godliness
linked to self-sufficiency held by intellectually competent persons. But the
admonition does not proceed in this way.
Stoics had derived their notion of self-sufficiency from Cynics and intel-
lectualized it. Cynics, in contrast, shunned the circuitous route of doctrine
and speculation, choosing rather the practical life of virtue, their so-called
"short cut to happiness." 69 Their view of self-sufficiency seemed straight­
forward to Diogenes Laertius (6.105): "They hold that we should live sim­
ply, eating only enough food (αύτάρκεσι σιτίοις), and wearing a single
garment, and they despise wealth, fame and noble birth." To a Cynic like
Diogenes of Sinope, "αυτάρκεια meant, broadly speaking, two things: on
the physical plane, contentment with the bare necessities of life; and on the
spiritual level, complete detachment from the world and worldly values...
Nothing... that was to be derived from any source external to himself had
any value for him or could affect him in any way." 70 But Cynics differed
among themselves to a considerable degree as to the practical implications
of this conviction. 71
The rigorous Demetrius (1st cent. A.D.) rejected all wealth, regardless
of the circumstances under which it would come to him. He would not
even accept it with the intention of giving it away, for the luxuries associ­
ated with wealth are not worth bestowing on others. 72 Such a radical view
of self-sufficiency would not permit the judicious use of wealth inculcated
i n i Tim 6:17-19.
Cynics of a milder disposition held to a more moderate view of αυτάρκεια
as early as Bion and Crates (4th-3rd cents. B.C.) and Teles (3rd cent. B.C.),
and later by Musonius Rufus (1st cent. A.D.) Rather than insist on self-
abnegation, they taught that one should be satisfied with what is available
to oneself (άρκούμενος τοις παροΰσιν, χρω τοις παροΰσιν), the real neces­
sities being simple food, clothing and shelter. 73 That seems to be the view
of αυτάρκεια in 1 Tim 6:6-8. Also similar is a popular attitude expressed
proverbially, namely, that "Whatever your situation, it is no good 'kicking
against the goad.' If one is poor, one can always practise being happy with
it, for instance by living 'the life of the jar' (after Diogenes the Cynic).
Partly, no doubt, to make the poor feel better about being poor, proverbs
strongly associate wealth (especially foreign wealth) with softness, luxury,
gluttony and sexual perversion.. ." 74
Epicureans, too, had a moderate view of self-sufficiency, but theirs was
more nuanced. 75 Like other philosophers, Epicurus believed that to live
rationally was to live naturally, but they differed on what that meant. Epi­
curus was known for the simplicity of his life, frequently living on only
bread and water, 76 and in reducing the bare necessities to protection from
hunger, thirst and cold {Sent. Vat. 33) he was similar to the Cynics, as he
was also in the conviction that the "greatest fruit of self-sufficiency is free­
dom" {Vat. Sat. 77). "A free life cannot acquire many possessions, because
this is not easy to do without servility to mobs or monarchs" {Sent. Vat. 67).
Epicureans differed from rigorous Cynics, for whom αυτάρκεια meant
that they were always to be satisfied with the minimum. Epicureans held
that self-sufficiency was a great good, not so as always to use a little, but so
as to be content with little (τοις ολίγοις άρκούμεθα) if they do not have
much (Diogenes Laertius 10.130). Unlike Cynics, who according to them
had the easiest way of life, stripping away everything possible, the Epicu­
77
rean view was more complex. The Epicurean does not live on the margin,
and he will not beg like the Cynics, nor does he live only for the moment,
but makes provision for the future and for a more affluent life than that of
78
the Cynics.
The Epicurean notion of self-sufficiency is associated with their notion
of natural wealth, to which I shall turn below, when considering the use of
wealth. For the moment, I only note that the ideal Epicurean is never self­
ish, but shares with others.
Even when reduced to necessity, a wise person knows better how to give than to
receive, for so great is the treasure of self-sufficiency that he has found. (Sent. Vat. 44)
A free life cannot acquire many possessions, because this is not easy to do without
fawning on the crowd or the powerful, but it possesses all things in continuous lavish-
ness. If by chance it obtains many possessions, it would easily distribute them so as to
obtain the good will of neighbors. (Sent. Vat. 67)
Here we have to do with a notion of αυτάρκεια that could accommodate
the behavior taught in 1 Tim 6:17-19.
However, the level on which αυτάρκεια is to be understood in 1 Tim
6:5-6, is not that of high philosophical reflection but of cliché. That appears
further to be the case from the way the author clarifies what he means
by αυτάρκεια ουδέν γαρ είσενέγκαμεν εις τον κόσμον, δτι ουδέ έξενέγκειν
τι δυνάμεθα (ν. 7). Γάρ is explanatory (BAGD s.v. 2), "you see," "to
make this clearer," and δτι is consecutive (BAGD s.v. 5. c ) , "so that."
The elucidation of what is meant by αυτάρκεια thus reads, "You see, we
brought nothing into the world, so we can't carry anything out of it." 79
Commentators regularly refer to the proverbial character of the statement
and provide numerous references to Jewish sapiential and Greek and Latin
texts where the same sentiment is expressed. 80 Whether proverb or merely
cliché, it is as ordinary an expression as the modern quip, "You can't take it
with you," 81 and cannot bear the heavy theologizing that is sometimes laid
upon it. 82 The function of the cliché is simply to clarify that by αυτάρκεια
is meant a stripped down way of life, the characteristics of which are then
stated concretely in v. 8, namely, to make do with the food and covering
that are at hand. Here, ευσέβεια does not qualify or elevate αυτάρκεια as
it does γυμνάσια in 4:7-8, but the reverse is the case: αυτάρκεια, so self-
evident in meaning as to be clarified by cliché, qualifies ευσέβεια.
The natural sequence in the discussion (πορισμός-αύτάρκεια) now contin­
ues to wealth (πλουτειν) and greed (φιλαργυρία) (w. 9-10). In contrast
(δέ) to those content with the bare necessities of life are people who wish
to be rich (οι βουλόμενοι πλουτειν) and yearn for money (ή φιλαργυρία,
ης τίνες όρεγόμενοι). 83 In view are people to whom wealth does not come
involuntarily or who have a moderate desire for it, but people who single-
mindedly pursue it. This makes the connection between wealth and greed
a natural one. Among the stock parts of this negative depiction of wealth
are the nature of greed (πλεονεξία, φιλαργυρία, avaritia), the craving for
money that is associated with it (δρεξις, ορέγομαι, ζήλος, cupiditas), and
85
the insatiability ofthat craving.
Moralists inveighed against the hedonism of spending on what is super­
86
fluous, on pleasures, lavishing money on ones appetites (έπιθυμίαι).
More striking is the detail with which the miseries of being wealthy are
described, as by Seneca:
For one must pay the penalty for all greedy acts; although the greed is enough of a
penalty in itself {nulla enim avaritia sine poena est, quamvis satis sit ipsa poenarum).
What tears and toils does money wring from us! Greed is wretched in that which it
craves and wretched in that which it wins! Think besides of the daily worry which
afflicts every possessor in proportion to the measure of his gain! The possession of
riches means even greater agony of spirit than the acquisition of riches. {Ep. 115.16;
trans. R. M. Gummere, LCL)
Greed causes misery, hardship, toil, danger, blood, death and destruction. 87
It compels us to make money, but forbids the use of it; lovers of money
endure the pain, but do not get the pleasures. 88 It causes anxieties
(φροντίδας) and distractions. 89 Palladas complained, "Gold, father of
flatterers, son of pain and care (οδύνης καί φροντίδος), it is fear (φόβος) to
have you and pain (οδύνη) not to have you." 90 Greed causes injuries and
losses (βλάβας, ζημίας), is destructive (έπ' όλέθρφ) and many examples
can be cited of overpowering disasters that resulted from the folly and
wickedness (της άνοιας καί της πονηρίας) of greed. 91 People destroy
(άπολύουσι) life and even divine things for money. 92
The warning in 1 Tim 6:9-10 clearly belongs to this critique of wealth,
as the following terms from the two verses indicate: επιθυμίας κολλάς
ανόητους καί βλαβηράς, δλεθρον καί άπώλειαν, ή φιλαργυρία, ης τίνες
όρεγόμενοι, όδύναις πολλαΐς. The proverb which explains (γάρ) the depic­
tion of people who aspire to wealth (v. 8), "Greed is the root of all evil,"
appears in slightly different forms throughout ancient literature. 93
The paraenesis on αυτάρκεια and φιλαργυρία in w. 6-10 remains on a
popular level, devoid of the kind of reflection associated with the philoso­
phers just cited or referred to. There is no mention of moderation, super­
fluity or other considerations that would widen the lens on wealth. The
focus is tight, on the lust for wealth and the condition of those so afflicted.
Justification for the positive statement about αυτάρκεια (οτι in v. 7b), and
the warning to those who lust after wealth (γάρ in v. 10a) remains on the
level of cliché or proverb. The author does in v. 9 describe the emotional
and moral ruin into which the craving for wealth tumbles people, but the
support for this depiction is a proverb that enables him to describe the ter-
rible things people do to themselves when they allow their greed to control
themselves.
As in v. 5, the philosophical basis for the condition of the errorists is not
exploited in favor of the claim that they were deprived of the truth
(έπεστερημένων της αληθείας), in v. 10 the root (!) cause of their moral
quandary is that they were led astray from the faith (άπεπλανήθησαν άπο
της πίστεως). But the stress is on the warning in v. 9, which strengthens the
paraenetic appeal to be self-sufficient.
The discussion of wealth, to be concluded in w. 17-19, is interrupted by a
section of text that has appeared so odd in its present location to commen­
94
tators that some have thought it to be an interpolation or intrusion.
There is general agreement that traditional material is used here, especially
in the credal section, w. 13-16, but different suggestions have been offered
as to the origin of the material and the function to which it is put in its
present context. 95 It is not necessary for the purpose of this paper to treat
w. 11-16 in detail, for my interest is in the attitude toward and the use of
wealth in 1 Tim 6. But the following observations will help those topics to
be seen in sharper relief and demonstrate that w. 11-16 does not sit as
loosely in its context as is frequently averred.
Verses 11-16 are integral to the chapter, but not as a contrast between
true and false preachers, who are sometimes thought to be in view through­
out w. 3-21. 96 Formally, w. 11-16 is paraenesis strengthened by theologi­
cally dense credal material, as paraenesis in w. 6-10 is strengthened by
warnings, finally couched in a proverb. 97 Intricately constructed theologi­
cal formulations are also used to support paraenesis in Titus 2:1-14
(11-14) and 3:1-7 (3-7), as is the case in 1 Tim 6:11-16 (13-16).
Paraenetic markers are pronounced at the beginning of the section. The
pattern φεΰγε/δίωκε is paraenetic, setting before the hearers or listeners the
choices open to them, frequently summarized by vice and virtue lists, often
in that order. 98 In v. 11, ταΰτα marks a transition in the paraenesis and
refers back to the vices in w. 6-10, which form a backdrop for the parae­
nesis to Timothy." It is typical of paraenesis that what is said to Timothy
is an antithesis (δε) of what precedes. 100 Ταΰτα and δέ thus syntactically
connect v. 11 to what precedes.
The paraenesis to Timothy is sharpened by the use of συ, the vocative
ώ άνθρωπε θεοΰ, which is derived from the OT, 1 0 1 and the 2nd pers. sing,
imperatives of the verbs in w. 11 and 12. 102 The way 2nd pers. sing, imper­
atives function in paraenesis is vividly illustrated in Ps.-Isocrates, Ad
Demonicum, the classic example of paraenesis in ancient literature. 103 The
purpose of the treatise is to instruct young men in virtue (5). After praising
virtue in general terms and stressing the importance of Hipponicus,
Demonicuss father, "Isocrates" claims that it is not possible for the mind
to be properly disposed in the contest for virtue unless it is filled with
noble maxims (καλών ακουσμάτων), "for, as it is the nature of the body to
be developed by appropriate exercises, it is the nature of the soul to be
developed by moral precepts" (12). Then follow dozens of 2nd pers. sing,
imperatives, whose reference is obviously wider than Demonicus himself,
in fact, the young men Isocrates had in mind. 1 0 4
The imperatives function in similar fashion in 1 Tim 6:11-16. They are
addressed to Timothy, but are to be understood as applying to the church
as well. In 4:14-16, for example, ostensibly personal instructions are given
to Timothy, but his conduct is described as exemplary to others, whose
salvation he will effect as he heeds the instructions given to himself. In
5:1-2 (cf. 7), commands addressed to him have to do with his personal
conduct, but τίμα in 5:3 introduces the community s responsibilities to
widows. It is not incongruous, then, that the specification of such laudable
personal qualities of Timothy should appear in community paraenesis
(cf. 5:20-25). The many commands to Timothy throughout the letter serve
105
in the same way.
Grammar thus shows that w. 11-13 are not so focused on Timothy that
we have to do here with a new, discrete text. An examination of the con­
tent of v. 11 will demonstrate that it, too, is connected with what precedes.
The content of the virtue list in v. 11, consisting of nouns in the singular
in contrast to plural vices, 106 sounds formulaic and like development of the
Pauline triad πίστις, αγάπη and έλπίς, 1 0 7 and generalized with no bearing
on w. 4-10. 108 The latter suspicion may be strengthened by the parallel in
2 Tim 2:22, τάς δε νεωτερικας επιθυμίας φεΰγε, δίωκε δε δικαιοσύνην,
πίστιν, άγάπην, είρήνην, and by Titus 2:12, παιδεύουσα ήμας, ίνα
άρνησάμενοι την άσέβειαν καί τας κοσμικας επιθυμίας σωφρονως και
δικαίως και εύσεβώς ζήσωμεν, with the classical cardinal virtues lurking
in the background. 109 That δικαιοσύνη stands at the head of the list in two
of these passages and is paired with ευσέβεια (εύσεβώς) in one further
strengthens the surmise, for the two are paired in honorary inscriptions
and epitaphs, which further testify to their popular currency. 110 Whether
these inscriptions are witnesses to popular morality on the social level with
which Teresa Morgan is concerned may not be certain, but they do testify
to the ubiquity of the pairing of the two qualities. The similarity of these
inscriptions to 1 Tim 6:11 has been thought to be purely formal and inci­
dental, 111 but more can be said about the matter.
The combination was widespread in Greek literature, δικαιοσύνη
describing ones responsibility to people, ευσέβεια (or όσιότης) ones
responsibility to the divine. 112 It also appears in moral instruction of the
sort that informed the Pastoral Epistles, where the distinction between the
two is not absolute, as for example, in Musonius Rufus, Ep. Pancr. 5 (139,
5-7 Hense): "Would you not want (our children) to have given attention
to divine and human matters, to be adorned with piety and holiness
(ευσέβεια και όσιότητι) toward the gods and with justice and holiness
(δικαιοσύνη καί όσιότητι) toward men.. .?" 1 1 3
Of special interest to 1 Tim 6:11 are those texts that relate δικαιοσύνη
alone or with ευσέβεια to wealth. Ps.-Isocrates, Dem. 38 provides a nice
counterpoint to the yearning (όρεγόμενοι) for wealth (v. 10; see at n. 58):
"To strive for justice (όρέγεσθαι δικαιοσύνης); not wanting more than
one s fair share. Δικαιοσύνη is better than wealth in that wealth benefits us
only while we live, while justice brings us glory after we are dead." And
Theognis 145-148 combines the two: "Choose to dwell with little wealth
a pious man (εύσεβέων) than to be rich with possession ill-gotten. Righ­
teousness (δικαιοσύνη) containeth the sum of all virtue; every righteous
man (δίκαιος), Cyrnus, is good." (trans. J.M. Edmonds, LCL). Such pas­
sages suggest that the appearance of δικαιοσύνη in v. 11 is not formal or
incidental, but that it belongs naturally in a discussion of attitudes toward
wealth.
The same thing is true of ευσέβεια. It is noteworthy that it does not
appear in the more formulaic parallel 2 Tim 2:22. The reason it does appear
in v. 11 is that the preceding discussion had been introduced by claims
about ευσέβεια and self-sufficiency. The natural way to read ευσέβεια is in
light of w. 5 and 6.
The same can be said of πίστις. To be sure, πίστις does appear in the
formulaic 2 Tim 2:2 and again in 1 Tim 1:18-19 and 2 Tim 4:6-8, with
extended athletic metaphors (in the latter with δικαιοσύνη), all of which
may suggest that the author was using what was to him a stock expression
regardless of context. Nevertheless, the context of v. 11 suggests something
more than a formulaic use here. The emphatic paraenetic charge in v. 12,
to fight the good fight of faith (άγωνίζου τον καλόν αγώνα της πίστεως)
114
draws attention to πίστις, one of the six qualities to pursue. Why this
stress on pursuing faith? In order to distinguish Timothy from the greedy
persons who had abandoned the faith (v. 10). The extension of the list of
qualities to be pursued with αγάπη, υπομονή and πραϋπαθία does the same
thing. These qualities are opposite the harsh, precipitous existence of the
greedy people described in w. 6-10.
In addition to these paraenetic features which connect w. 11-16 to what
precedes, there are theological elements, beginning in v. 12, that establish
a connection with what follows. Timothy is to lay hold of eternal life
(έπιλαβοΰ της αιωνίου ζωής, v. 12), and the rich are to conduct themselves
in such a manner that they might lay hold of real life (ϊνα έπιλάβωνται τής
δντως ζωής, ν. 19). God is the source of all life (θεοΰ του ζφογονοΰντος τα
πάντα, ν. 13) as he is the supplier of all riches (θεφ τφ παρέχοντι ήμιν
πάντα πλουσίως, ν. 18). There is an eschatological scheme in which God
works out his purpose (w. 14-15), and the wealthy are to live aware that
their actions in the present (εν τω νυν αιώνι, v. 17) prepare for their future
life (θεμέλιον καλόν εις το μέλλον, ν. 19).
Verses 11-16, far from being an intrusion into the paraenesis of ch. 6,
is integral to it. Its grammatical and formal characteristics as well as con­
tent show it to be of the same cloth. Where it differs from the paraenesis
earlier in the chapter is that it focuses on Timothy, the man of God. Call-
ing to mind his good confession (w. 12-13) provides the occasion for
a pronouncedly theological foundation for a moral mandate to Timothy
(w. 14-16), and with that the stage is set for the exhortation to the rich in
w. 17-19.