Pauls use of Scripture has been a focus of research among Pauline scholars for
many years. Prior to the publication of Richard Hays' groundbreaking study,
Echoes of Scripture in the Letters of Paul, such research tended to focus on what
Hays calls "essential technical tasks of scholarship," such as the cataloging of
Paul's quotations and allusions and their introductory formulas. Since
Hays' study, scholars have turned their attention more to Paul's interpreta­
tion of Scripture and the resulting significance of his quotations and allu­
sions for the meaning of what he has written. The current surge in studies
of Paul's use of Scripture in specific passages from his writings promises
eventually to yield a full account of his interpretive activity and lead us to
2
a vastly greater understanding of his epistles.
However, Christopher Stanley has challenged the standard scholarly
assumption that Paul's audiences could understand his biblical quotations
and allusions, a notion that grounds the present large-scale reassessment of
Paul's use of Scripture, at least implicidy. 3 If he is right, then the bulk of
contemporary research into Paul's Schriftgebrauch is misguided, and its
promise of advancing our understanding of Paul's epistles is largely empty.
But fortunately, an assessment of Stanley's arguments reveals that they do
not succeed in characterizing (albeit facetiously) Paul's original audiences
as swine who were too ignorant to understand his scriptural quotations
and allusions. On the other hand, Stanley's case does demand a nuanced
view of "the way Paul and his audiences interacted with the biblical text." 4
A careful sifting of the evidence would suggest that Paul's original audiences
would be better characterized as "diamonds in the rough," groups that might
at first appear to be scripturally ignorant, but whose respective aggregate
knowledge would have rendered them capable of interacting with sophisti­
cated forms of biblical allusion, rhetoric, and argumentation. 5 This article
will critically examine Stanley's case for the biblical ignorance of Paul's
original audiences and seek to set forth a nuanced view of their reader
competency that accounts for the realities of ancient texts and literacy, yet
does justice to what Stanley acknowledges was Paul's routine assumption
"that his audience... knows the biblical text well enough to supply the
6
background and context for many of his quotations."
Stanley makes his argument for the overall scriptural ignorance of Paul's
original audiences by way of identifying and discussing what he regards to
7
beten questionable assumptions traditionally made by scholars. But there
is significant overlap in his argumentation and the reasons he gives to sup­
port it. So instead of discussing each of the assumptions he challenges, we
will address the major points that he makes or approaches that he takes to
support his case. Among these, two points in particular serve as the founda­
tion of his position and will be identified accordingly in the following discus­
sion: limited access to written texts of Scripture and widespread illiteracy.
But before examining the specifics of Stanley's case, a caveat is in order.
We should preface our reflections by observing that contemplation of the
question of the reader competency of Paul's original audiences involves a
great deal of conjecture. We just do not have much if any direct evidence
of what scriptural resources Paul's original audiences actually possessed, as
Stanley acknowledges. 8 The only concrete evidence we have about these
specific groups is Paul's letters to them, which Stanley admits imply biblically
knowledgeable audiences. 9 1 make the point for two reasons. First, this fact
should keep us from making our estimation of first-century reader compe-
tence determinative for our assessment of Paul's use of the Old Testament.
When issue after issue related to the question involves conjecture about
what might have been the case amidst varying plausible scenarios, and
then these speculations are used to make judgments about other uncertain
points, it becomes unjustifiable to chide the scholarly consensus as histori-
cally unrealistic. As will be argued later on, the state of our evidence should
steer us toward Paul and his interpretive activity, not his audience, as the
key to understanding his biblical quotations and allusions. Second, by
entering into dialogue with Stanley on these issues, I will necessarily be
entering into a minefield of conjecture. But since Stanley has opened this
can of worms, claiming that the standard scholarly view of these matters
is implausible, it is worth asking whether his reconstruction really makes
better sense out of the evidence and what state of affairs is most likely to
have been the case.
Stanley's first foundational claim of two in his case for the scriptural igno-
rance of Paul's original audiences is that he believes it to be unlikely that
the churches Paul wrote to would have had ready access to biblical scrolls,
primarily because of their great cost. 10 But although copies of Scripture
were expensive, 11 Gamble, whose study of books and readers in the early
church Stanley righdy values, has concluded that expense was not a significant
obstacle to private ownership of texts. 12 Correspondingly, Dietrich-Alex
Koch notes that, "Dies zeigt sich in 4 Makk 18,10-19, wo die private Benut-
zung des schriftlichen Textes von insgesamt acht verschiedenen <Schriften>
Kennzeichen eines frommen jüdischen Hauses ist." 13 And 2 Timothy 4:13
represents Paul as owning his own Scripture scrolls, 14 while Acts 8:27ff.
tells the story of the Ethiopian eunuch who had his own copy of at least
some of the Scriptures. Koch's judgment is probably correct: "Privater Besitz
von Rollen der <Schriften> ist im 1. Jh. n. Chr. zwar sicher keine reine
Alltäglichkeit, aber gewiß keine unwahrscheinliche Ausnahme gewesen." 15
But if private ownership of Scripture was not rare, it seems probable
that a large group of people, who could pool their resources, would have
made sure they obtained that which was foundational to their common life.
The amount such cooperation could collect is suggested by Acts 19:18-19,
which claims that after believing, many in Ephesus who had practiced magic
burned their magic books, the sum total of which came to an astounding
fifty thousand silver drachmas. 16 If it be questioned whether Scripture
really played a central role in the early Christian community, we can say
that Stanley himself appears to grant this point. As Gamble remarks in a
passage that Stanley quotes approvingly, Scripture "had a constitutive
importance" in the early Christian community. 17 Indeed, it is commonly
assumed by historians of liturgy that Christian meetings included the read-
ing and exposition of Scripture from the beginning. 18 Wayne Meeks' com-
ments would seem to represent a consensus: "That scripture texts were read
and homilies were based on them seems very credible indeed... [T]he rich
allusions to and arguments from scripture that Paul sometimes includes in
his letters... presuppose some means for learning both text and traditions
of interpretation. Regular readings and homilies in the assemblies are the
most plausible." 19 It is not surprising, then, that we find what appears to be
an injunction to the practice of the public reading of Scripture in 1 Tim.
4:13. We might also ask where New Testament authors obtained access to
Scripture for use in the composition of their writings.
Indeed, Stanley acknowledges that, "We do know... that Paul and other
early Christian authors studied regularly in the Greek text of the Jewish
Scriptures." 20 But how can this be so if access to Scripture scrolls was really
as limited as Stanley insists? On the other hand, if Christian authors had
enough access to the text of Scripture to produce the writings of the New
Testament, which are saturated with profound biblical allusions and argu­
mentation, then why should we not expect that these Christian leaders and
theologians would have made use of their access to the biblical text in
order to obtain it for their own communities, which considered Scripture
to be vital to their existence as God s people?
Stanleys own theory that Christian authors merely made use of personal
notebooks containing only key verses they had copied from the Jewish
Scriptures 21 does not answer this question satisfactorily because he grants
that there must have been access to biblical scrolls and at least some copy­
ing of those scrolls (i.e., into notebooks). It would seem that the difference
between the traditional scholarly assumption of free ancient Christian
access to Scripture and Stanleys allegedly more realistic postulate of rela­
tively restricted access ultimately turns not on objective historical factors
related to the cost or availability of books, but upon whether early Christian
leaders thought the word of God was worth the effort of obtaining it. 22 In
this light, it is hard to imagine that early Christian leaders would not have
availed themselves of the opportunity to acquire copies of Scripture for
their communities.
There certainly were many ways that early churches might have obtained
copies of Scripture. 23 Roy Ciampa, for example, points to the importance
of patronage systems for "the establishment and growth of the early Christian
movement" and the very plausible possibility that wealthy believers may have
provided copies of Scripture for their churches. 24 In relation to this insight,
we may consider Stambaugh and Balchs observation that many groups of
the ancient world
had one or more wealthy members who fulfilled the role of patrons... Most of these
societies depended on the generosity of one or several patrons to supplement the more
modest contributions of ordinary members. These patrons were expected to provide
more elaborate banquets, for example, or to pay for the construction of a new temple.
The hosts of Christian house churches functioned in a way analogous to that of such
patrons. 25
But there were important differences between the Greco-Roman associa­
tions and the Christian communities. Meeks notes that "the Christian groups
were exclusive and totalistic in a way that no club nor even any pagan cultic
association was... to be 'baptized into Christ Jesus'... signaled for Pauline
converts an extraordinarily thoroughgoing resocialization, in which the sect
was intended to become virtually the primary group for its members, sup­
planting all other loyalties." 26 Given that all other loyalties came second, it
is probable that such committed groups would obtain what they regarded as
essential—the word of God. Prisca and Aquila (Rom l6:3-5), and Philo-
Iogus and Julia (Rom 16:15) seem to have been such patrons in Rome,
while Chloe, Stephanus, and others may have played this role in Corinth
(1 Cor 1:11,16). Surely it would be a mistake to underestimate the extremes
to which religious devotion can drive people (cf., e.g., Acts 2:44-47; 4:32-35),
especially in relation to having access to the very words of God. History is
full of examples of spectacular feats and remarkable self-sacrifice for the
cause of religion such as the sixteenth century Peter Bales' writing of a
28
Bible so small that it could be contained in a walnut shell, giving of
extraordinary amounts of money and the sharing of possessions, Origens
castration of himself to avoid potential scandal in teaching female catechu­
29
mens, and the modern phenomenon of suicide bombing.
But, as our earlier comments would suggest, it is not even necessary to
assume that Paul's churches bought copies of Scripture to suppose that they
had them. They might have copied the Scriptures themselves. Bar-Ilan
indicates that copying of the Scriptures was not uncommon 30 and Gamble
describes a historical context that renders it very likely that a great deal of
copying of the Scriptures took place in the first century. 31 Generally, paper
(papyrus) was readily available for the task. 32 Indeed, we know that copying
of Paul's letters was taking place among the churches to which he wrote. As
Paul Achtemeier observes, "The wide distribution of copies of the writings
of the N T gives evidence of the extent to which literature could circulate
33
even among the less prominent members of Hellenistic culture."
In view of all that we have considered, I believe it is probable that Paul
would have expected many of his churches to have their own copies of
Scripture, if they did not simply make use of synagogue copies. This means
that Paul would probably have expected his original audiences to (1) be
sufficiently familiar with Scripture so as to benefit from his scriptural quo­
tations and allusions, and (2) possess the ability to reflect on them further
in their original contexts if they so chose.
At this point it may be helpful to draw attention to a pervasive defect in
Stanley's argumentation that comes to the surface early on in his discus­
sion—a minimalistic historical methodology for the reconstruction of the
situation of Paul's original audiences. His minimalistic historical judgments
frequently function practically as arguments from silence, implying that
because we do not have positive evidence that some specific possibility was
the case, we can therefore conclude that it was not the case or at least that
we should discount it as having any practical value. This can be seen, for
example, when he minimizes the possibility that wealthy Christian patrons
provided copies of Scripture for their churches by saying that "we have no
sure evidence for such a practice in Paul's day." 34 But this is not the type
of information we would expect to have hard historical evidence concern­
ing (cf. the scholarly adage, "the absence of evidence is not necessarily the
evidence of absence").
Moreover, in arguing against the scholarly consensus, Stanley bears the
burden of proof. The prima facie evidence of Paul's epistles suggests that
his audiences had enough access to Scripture to understand his biblical
quotations and allusions. Reasonable possibilities for how these groups
could have accessed Scripture then confirm what the letters suggest. We do
not need evidence that copies of Scripture were obtained by any specific
means to interpret Paul's letters on the working assumption that his audiences
might have had access to the Scriptures; we need only establish that this is
a reasonable possibility, which Stanley would have to concede. Further­
more, there are a number of specific factors relating to the early Christian
movement that would suggest extraordinary motivation for obtaining con­
tinuing regular access to the Scriptures. The problem here seems to be that
Stanley has decided to "give more credence to evidence gleaned from gen­
eral studies of texts and literacy in the ancient world than to the specific
information embedded in Paul's letters." 35 This is an extremely problematic
practice because of how widely specific groups can diverge from their
surrounding culture.
Stanley attempts to defend this approach by appealing to the concepts
of the implied author and the implied audience, 36 asserting that, "What we
encounter in Paul's letters is not the 'real' Paul or the 'real' audience, but
Paul's momentary construction of both himself and his intended audience." 37
He suggests that Paul constructed "an audience that was both literate and
familiar with the Jewish Scriptures" when "his actual audience was mostly
illiterate and possessed only limited knowledge of the biblical text" 38 based
largely on the notion that Paul may not have known how much knowledge
of Scripture his audiences possessed. 39 But is it not presumptuous to claim
to know Paul's audiences better than he did? Surely Paul was in a much
better position to judge the reader competence of his first-century Chris­
tian audiences than we are thousands of years after the fact. Here we can
see the full flowering of Stanley's preference for general knowledge of the
ancient world over specific information embedded in Paul's letters and just
how far off the mark it can lead historical judgments.
In addition to an allegedly limited access to biblical scrolls, Stanley also
argues that a lack of textual markers in ancient manuscripts would hinder
the location of specific texts by Paul's audiences. 40 But most ancient manu­
scripts seem to have used some form of paragraphing, even if different
systems were employed in different manuscripts. 41 Moreover, the degree of
difficulty in finding biblical passages in the first century may not have been
as great as we, who live in the age of chapter and verse divisions, would
expect. The ease of reference which we are accustomed to may cause us to
overestimate the level of difficulty that obtained for those who were used
to handling books in that milieu. Difficulty is, after all, often relative and a
matter of degree, dependent on experiential knowledge of a different reality. 42
As Roberts and Skeat have commented concerning the alleged difficulty of
re-rolling a papyrus roll, "the problem... is based on nothing more than a
projection back into the past of the probable reactions of a present-day
43
reader." All of this is to say that finding specific biblical references was
more difficult than in our technological, time-driven age, but hardly
impossible or overly burdensome. The New Testament represents Scripture
as being looked up, as with Jesus in the synagogue of Nazareth (Lk. 4:17)
and the Bereans who were considered to be noble-minded because they
searched the Scriptures daily as they examined Paul's teaching (Acts 17:11). 44
There is also a false assumption implicit in the objection under consid­
eration that the sheer difficulty of the task would prevent its performance
by stifling motivation. But the radical commitment of the early Christian
movement and its intense devotion to Scripture have been two of its char­
acteristic features that we have already had occasion to note (and will
return to) in our discussion. I submit that they were motivated for the task.
Luke's commendation of the Bereans reveals the ethos of the early church
and a concern to examine the Scriptures cited in Christian teaching while
the character of the New Testament documents suggests a familiarity with
Scripture that speaks of both study and the locating of fitting Scriptural
passages.
But Stanley views another obstacle to the regular reading and study of
Scripture by Paul's audiences to be the greatest of all—widespread illiter­
acy. This is the other foundational point in his argument against the bibli­
cal knowledge of Paul's audiences. He cites the groundbreaking study of
William Harris that concludes that literacy rates in classical antiquity were
no higher than ten to twenty percent. For Stanley, "The inevitable con­
clusion is that not more than a few individuals in Paul's churches, those
recruited from the educated elite, would have been capable of reading and
46
studying the Scriptures for themselves." While this conclusion may be
slightly overstated, the basic point must be granted. Most of the members
of Paul's original audiences would not have been able to read the Scriptures
(or Paul's letters) individually for themselves. But Stanley facilely infers that
this would mean that the vast majority of the members of Paul's audiences
were scripturally ignorant and unable to assess his use of the biblical text.
For it is unwise, and indeed anachronistic, to assume that illiteracy
equals ignorance in what has been called "a culture of high residual orality
which nevertheless communicated significandy by means of literary
47
creations." It will not do to raise the specter of illiteracy over Paul's original
audiences without also considering the oral nature of their environment
and the degree to which literacy and orality interpenetrated one another in
late western antiquity. Catherine Hezser's recent survey of approaches to
ancient literacy in modern scholarship reveals such interpénétration as one
of the more frequent points of agreement between divergent approaches to
the topic. 48 As she observes while reviewing Bowman's views, even if most
of the population was not able to read and write, "the society in which they
lived could be profoundly literate': illiterates could participate in it through
intermediaries who wrote and read for them. Accordingly, one has to assume
that 'a large proportion of the 80% + illiterate population was thoroughly
familiar with literate modes'. " 49 Indeed, Pieter Botha cautions us:
We must remind ourselves that the connection between education and literacy, which
seems so natural to us, is simply a cultural convention of our own times. In Graeco-
Roman societies one could be educated without having the ability to read and write.
In fact, being literate (proficient with texts) was not even necessarily connected to
50
oneself writing and reading.
Thus, it is with full warrant that Wagner concludes that "the fact that per­
haps most members of the Pauline communities would not have been able
to read for themselves would not have been a significant barrier to their close
acquaintance with Paul's letters (or, for that matter, with Israel's scriptures)." 51
Mention of orality raises the importance of memory for those to whom
Paul wrote and the way they would interact with written texts to which
they had exposure. According to Jocelyn Penny Small, "Memory became
the classical means of cognitively organizing and, most significantly, retriev­
ing words," and "training in memory was an integral part of the educational
curriculum by the time of the Romans." 52 Hence, the ancients are renowned
for the strength of their memories, 53 which they tended to rely on rather
than consulting texts. 54 We cannot assume that members of a culture of
high residual orality would need to consult written texts in order to recall
passages they had been exposed to, especially since they would tend to
memorize texts they regarded as important. As Stanley himself acknowl­
edges, first century Jews were trained from childhood to quote the Bible
from memory. 55
Stanley seems willing to concede that Jewish members of Paul's audi­
ences would have had substantial knowledge of Scripture. 56 But he assumes
that few Gentiles in Paul's churches did. 57 Such an assertion confirms
Ciampa's observation that "there tends to be an assumed and over-confident
pessimism with regard to how much Scripture a Gentile Christian could
be expected to detect. But being a Gentile and former idolater does not
necessarily mean that one is not formed by Scripture and sensitive to its
presence in religious discourse." 58 He argues convincingly that Gentile
God-fearers were considered idolaters, even though they "may well have
accepted many Jewish customs and been well-taught in the Scriptures,"
because they had not fully converted. 59
Gentile God-fearers may have been very familiar with Scripture through
contact with the synagogue, where "the whole Bible was called upon, and
the synagogue transformed into a sort of immense 'living concordance' of
the sacred text." 60 According to Shaye Cohen, many Gentiles converted to
Judaism in the ancient world and even more adopted certain aspects of
Judaism without converting such as attending synagogue. 61 This accords
with the testimony of Josephus, who tells us that the Jewish laws had "to
an ever increasing extent excited the emulation of the world at large... The
masses have long... shown a keen desire to adopt our religious obser­
vances ... as God permeates the universe, so the Law has found its way
62
among all mankind." Indeed, there were instances of synagogues contrib­
63
uted by non-Jews. Moreover, it appears that many Gentiles who became
Christians had been Gentile God-fearers who were exposed to the Chris­
tian message through their connection to the synagogue (e.g., Acts 13:43;
17.Ί-15). 64 All of this suggests that it is unwise simply to assume that Gen­
tile Christians had no knowledge of Scripture. 65
Even more important in this connection is the fact that Gentiles would
receive scriptural instruction in the church. Surprisingly, Stanley confidently
dismisses this possibility as "entirely hypothetical." 66 But, "We know from
Acts and elsewhere in the N T that Jewish and Gentile believers were
trained in their new faith on the basis of the OT, the Bible of the early
67
church (e.g. Acts 17:10-12; 18:24-28; 2 Tim. 2:2, 15; 3:16-17)." Indeed,
the main function of early church leaders was to teach the Scriptures (Acts
6:2,4; Gal 6:6; 1 Tim 3:2; 4:13-16; 5:17; 2 Tim 3:14-4:3; Heb 13:7; 1
Pet 1:24-2:3; 5:1-2). There is no telling the extent of scriptural training in
the early churches. But the early church commitment to its faith and Scrip­
ture suggests that it was extensive indeed, as does the frequent use of the
Old Testament in the New Testament documents. While we have no way
of knowing how long Gentiles in a given church had been studying the
Scriptures, it is natural to assume a normal range, including many Gentiles
with years of experience.
It is also extremely important to recognize that, in the significantly oral
environment of Pauls churches, the reading and study of Scripture and
Pauls letters would have generally been a community activity as in the
synagogue, 68 and that this community activity would encourage interac­
tion over Pauls letters and provide opportunity for gaining insight into his
Old Testament allusions. Even Stanley recognizes that some in Paul's audi­
ences would know Scripture well. 69 He further recognizes that those who
did were likely to have been leaders in the early churches. 70 So we can safely
assume that, at the very least, some of the leaders in each of Pauls churches
were able to hear his letters with considerable biblical knowledge.
But not only would Paul have probably expected some of his audience
to be well versed in Scripture, but it is likely that he also could have counted
on them hearing his letter(s) over and over again, providing many oppor­
tunities to discern and understand the various allusions upon subsequent
readings. "This is based on the known fact in the second century and the
probability in the first century that letters were read repeatedly in the early
church, as implied for example, by Col. 4:16; 1 Thess. 5:27; and Rev. 1:3." 71
It seems highly probable, therefore, that Paul would have expected the lead­
ers of his churches to grasp his scriptural allusions and their import for his
arguments. Given the likelihood of repeated readings, it is possible that
Paul could have expected his letters to be used for teaching, and that teach­
ers would have studied his scriptural allusions and shared their understand­
ing with their Christian community. As Wagner states, "it is difficult to
imagine a teaching office' in the early Pauline communities, however
informal (1 Cor 12:28-29; cf. Eph 4:11; 1 Tim 3:2; 2 Tim 2:2, 24), that
did not involve the interpretation of apostolic teaching—including Paul's
letters—to some degree." 72 Moreover, "it is quite likely that the bearers of
Paul's letters were charged by the apostle with the further responsibility of
helping to interpret them." 73 The fact that Paul's letters were retained and
copied testifies to the value they had for their first recipients. 74
It has often been pointed out that what we call the Old Testament was
the only Bible the early church had. But surely we have not done full jus­
tice to this observation until we have surmised that the Apostle Paul's writ­
ings, which are rich in scriptural allusion, must have functioned as guides
to the study and interpretation of the Bible for his churches. "Indeed, Paul
appears to have intended his interpretive arguments to model for his
churches a way of reading Israel's scriptures in the new light of the gospel.
Where the apostle reflects explicidy on his eschatological and ecclesiocen-
tric hermeneutic, he does so in order to commend this way of reading to
his listeners (e.g., Rom 15:4; 4:23-24; cf. 1 Cor 10:11)." 75
Thus, ironically, an appreciation of the dynamics of illiteracy in the first
century's culture of high residual orality helps us to understand that ancient
readers and audiences would have been sufficiently accustomed to the
demands of interacting with written texts so as to be capable of achieving
high levels of textual awareness and proficiency. 76 The realities of the first-
century context of Paul's original audiences suggest some type of corporate
setting in which repeated public readings and study of Paul's epistles would
be conducted by church leaders who would understand his Old Testament
allusions and share their understanding with the community. For it is all
but certain that (1) reading and interpreting Paul's letters was an ongoing
community process in his churches, and (2) there were at least some mem­
bers of the communities to which Paul wrote who could hear his argument
against the Old Testament background. This corporate context militates
against what may be called Stanley's highly individualistic approach. Though
he acknowledges the artificiality of his methodology and its lack of reliability
for discovering the actual interpretive experiences of Paul's original audi­
ences on the basis of other factors, 77 the individualistic orientation of his
model stretches its usefulness beyond the breaking point. For it assesses the
potential responses to Paul's rhetoric without regard for the community as if
each member of the audience in view received Paul's letter via email attach­
ment for a one-time reading or hearing to be considered alone. This strikes
me as totally inappropriate for assessment of churches in the collectivist,
residually oral culture of the first century.
Indeed, the corporate setting of Paul's churches raises some points that
Stanley himself makes, the implications of which ultimately prove fatal to
his approach to Paul's use of Scripture. Stanley's approach appears to rest
largely on the notion that Paul aimed his biblical quotations at "the illiterate
masses," who could not assess his biblical interpretation. 78 Yet drawing on
Stanley's own argumentation, we can say: (1) The first-century world of
Paul's churches was hierarchical, "built on respect for authority." 79 (2) Those
who could read and had significant knowledge of the Scriptures would have
been leaders in Paul's churches. 80 (3) In accordance with (1), these leaders
would have exercised extensive power and influence over the group in gen­
eral and in relation to Paul's letter(s) in particular, whether in reading,
discussion, or study. 81 (4) "[T]hese same people also possessed the ability
to evaluate and challenge Paul's interpretations of Scripture, and some of
them might have had political reasons for resisting the intrusion of an
outside authority, even a respected one like Paul, into the life of their
churches." 82 Moreover, if he were to misuse Scripture, "a reader familiar
with the original text would invariably have raised questions about the
validity of Paul's interpretation. Questions of this sort would have impeded
rather than advanced Paul's rhetorical purposes." 83
Therefore, it is highly unlikely that Paul would aim his biblical quota­
tions mainly at the scripturally ignorant, intentionally playing fast and
loose with Scripture, when the very people who would control the reading
and interpretation of Paul's letter would have been those who by Stanley's
own admission could have assessed Paul's interpretation and impeded his
rhetorical purposes. It is far more likely that Paul would have taken special
account of the scripturally learned in his audiences and attempt to craft his
biblical argumentation so as to be convincing to those who were familiar
with the original contexts of his quotations. This provides a better explana-
tion for why, in Stanley's words, Paul constructed "an audience that was
84
both literate and familiar with the Jewish Scriptures," than does Stanley's
own suggestions of either Paul's ignorance of his audiences or his attempt to
assert power over his audiences by awing them into submission through mere
85
quotation of the word of God without concern for its actual meaning.
This leads us to Stanley's routine but questionable assumption that Paul
often quoted Scripture out of context. While little more than an assertion
in his previous work, 86 Stanley has recently provided support for this view
in his treatment of a sampling of scriptural quotations in Paul's epistles. 87
But his conclusions in this regard are less than persuasive. 88 Numerous
examples could be furnished, but given the scope of the present essay, we
will have to limit ourselves to one instance.
Stanley asserts that Paul's use of Ps. 115:1 LXX (116:10, Heb/Eng.) in
2 Cor. 4:13 "is so far removed from the original context as to raise ques­
tions about Paul's reliability as an interpreter." 89 He bases this judgment on
the claim that whereas Paul applies the psalm to speaking good news, the
psalmist actually offers a word of complaint or despair. But this line of
reasoning is wholly suspect.
First, there is no reason to identify the point of the quotation's relevance
as the speaking of good news. Rather, what Paul identifies as the important
point of contact in relation to the quotation is the "spirit of faith" that
enlivens both the psalmist's and his own speech (2 Cor. 4:13). 90 And this
raises a critical second point: the psalmist's words are not a complaint for
which God humbled him as Stanley claims. Quite to the contrary, they are
an expression of faith in God despite suffering and opposition contained in a
psalm of thanksgiving which does indeed breathe a spirit of praise and joy. 91
It is difficult to see how Stanley misses this interpretation of the psalm
as at least plausible if not obvious. The words that Paul quotes are, "I
believed; therefore I spoke" (έπίστευσα διό έλάλησα). Given the context
of the psalm, it is highly unlikely to mean what Stanley claims it means.
The fact that the psalmist grounds (διό) his speech on faith ensures that he
is not suffering God's judgment for what he says. Rather than indicating
that the psalmist was humbled by God for complaining, it seems to state
that despite the fact that the psalmist was greatly afflicted, apparently as a
result of false accusations or some sort of injurious lying (v. 2), he spoke to
the Lord about his affliction in an attitude of trust in the Lord to deliver
him. This interpretation is confirmed by the fact that the psalm goes on to
thank and praise the Lord for deliverance, presumably from the affliction
of his lying enemies and in response to his faith-filled prayer making
known his wretched state. This interpretation is also clear in the Hebrew
text, which the LXX translates, stating that the psalmist believed when ['i]
he spoke about his affliction (Ps. 116:10). 92 The adversative δε in the LXX
of Ps. 115:1, which has no counterpart in the Hebrew text, highlights the
contrast between the psalmist's faith and his miserable state, yielding a
similar meaning, though more awkwardly. 93
Thus, the quotation fits excellently with Pauls argument and would
have provided the biblically informed auditor with deep insight into it. For
as Stanley admits, "Paul seeks to defend his ministry against some of the
questions that had been raised by the Corinthians" and, "The interpretive
comments that frame the verse imply that Paul viewed the quotation (or
wanted the Corinthians to view it) as a biblical warrant for his own minis­
94
try of preaching Christ despite all manner of troubles and opposition."
What is more, Paul opposes false teaching and appears to defend himself
against what he would regard as lies and slander propagated by false teach­
ers in Corinth who opposed him. 95 Moreover, one of these slanderous
accusations appears to have been that Pauls sufferings discredited him as
an apostle. 96 Hence the defensive tone of passages such as 4:7-12, which is
directly connected to Pauls quotation of Ps. 115:1. Indeed, it is from 4:10-
12's declaration that Paul continually carries around the death of Jesus in
his own body and is in fact continually given over to death for Jesus'
sake—epitomizing his sufferings—that his quotation of Ps. 115:1 emerges.
This is striking because of Ps. 115:6 s affirmation, "Precious before the Lord
is the death of his holy ones."
Thus, faced with tremendous opposition and suffering in the exercise of
his ministry and what he saw as a situation in which false teachers spread
a false gospel and slandered him for his gospel and his sufferings inter alia,
Paul appeals to Ps. 115 s declaration of trust in the Lord in the face of great
hardship and lying enemies. Those in Pauls audience who knew the con­
text of the psalm would be encouraged to see Paul as a righteous sufferer
and victim of slander bearing the Lords approval and destined for victory
by his hand. Moreover, Paul would hope that they saw that rather than
being a sign of divine disapproval or invalidating his ministry, his sufferings,
represented by the rhetorical figure of living death, were actually pleasing
to the Lord and should commend his ministry, for, "Precious before the
Lord is the death of his holy ones" (Ps. 115:6). Just as the psalmist was
delivered, Paul knows that he will be delivered, raised with Jesus from
suffering and death to life (2 Cor. 4:14). It is this faith in the Lord that
motivates his preaching. Though not particularly connected to the thanks­
giving offered in the psalm, Paul's reference to thanksgiving for the grace
of God in 4:15 fits nicely with the psalms expression of thanksgiving for
salvation.
If Paul had the surrounding psalms in mind as well, which is likely, then
the connections become even tighter. In the Hebrew text, the LXX s Psalms
114 and 115 are one psalm, and by the first century Psalms 112-117 LXX
(113-118 Heb.), known as the Egyptian Hallel, were used together at Pass­
over. The first two or three psalms would be sung before the Passover meal
and the rest after the meal. 97 The Hallel was also sung during the Feast of
Dedication and the Feast of Tabernacles. 98 Thus, these psalms were among
the most well-known passages of the Old Testament and bound to be
familiar to some, probably many, in Pauls audiences. With all of this in
mind, it is intriguing to note that Ps. 114:3, 8-9 LXX reveal that the
affliction from which the Lord delivered the psalmist was death. Conse­
quently, the words immediately preceding the passage Paul quotes in the
psalter (except for the word "Allelluia") read, "For he delivered my soul
from death... I will be pleasing before the Lord in the land of the living"
(Ps. 114:8-9 LXX). It is likely that Paul and his first-century contempo­
raries would have read the deliverance spoken of in Ps. 115 LXX to involve
deliverance from death, or in other words, a sort of resurrection. When
Paul said, "I believed; therefore I spoke," those who were familiar with the
psalm s original context would have partly heard trust in the Lord for deliv­
erance from death (resurrection), which is exactly what Paul speaks about
(see 2 Cor. 4:10-14, esp. v. 14).
In light of the evidence we have looked at, Stanleys conclusion that Paul
most likely "simply ran across a set of words that sounded like a good 'motto'
for his ministry and then copied them down (or memorized them) for later
99
use without regard for their original context" is hard to believe. But it
does serve as a warning about the danger of paying only superficial atten­
tion to the original contexts of Pauls quotations, a danger that seems to be
inherent in Stanleys approach. For the assumption that Paul (or his audi­
ence) was not concerned about the original contexts of his quotations will
tend to encourage careless and superficial analysis of those contexts. A bet­
ter approach, as I have argued elsewhere, 100 would be to analyze the origi­
nal contexts of Pauls scriptural quotations on the working assumption that
the quotations function as pointers to their original contexts. This will
encourage interpreters to pay sufficiently detailed attention to the back­
ground of Pauls quotations so as to make sound judgments concerning his
use of Scripture, his respect for context or lack thereof, and the significance
the original contexts of his quotations might have held for his readers.
Another problematic feature of Stanleys approach that also discourages
attention to the original contexts of Paul's quotations is his call to focus on
how Paul's original audiences understood his quotations rather than how
Paul intended them. 101 This seems like a dead end for understanding Paul's
epistles. For it should go without saying that in order to understand an
author and what he has written, one should primarily focus on that author
and what he has written. If that author quotes a source, then the best way
to understand the quotation as a part of the quoting author's communica­
tion is to understand the way the quoting author understands the quota­
tion and its relationship to his discourse. This is all the more so if the
author in question quotes what he believes to be the authoritative word of
God to which his views must conform. It comes down to a question of the
nature of exegesis. I would argue that the goal of exegesis should be to
determine the original intention of what an author has written.
Of course, this approach to exegesis is no longer a settled matter in New
102
Testament scholarship. But I think that it is fair to say that it is still the
more dominant approach among exegetes. This is probably due to at least
three factors. First, focusing on the author rather than his audience is sim­
ply the natural and intuitive approach to interpreting an author. Second,
the New Testament contains special literature in that it is considered by
many to be the word of God. Most people who study the Bible are far
more interested in what its authors were trying to communicate than how
its original recipients understood it. Even scholars who do not necessarily
believe the Bible to be the word of God are often involved in trying to help
others who do regard the Bible as authoritative to some degree to under­
stand what the authors of the Bible intended to communicate. Third,
specific knowledge of how Paul's and the other New Testament writers'
audiences responded to their extant writings is virtually nonexistent. The
whole enterprise of trying to determine how the original audience under­
stood Paul is so speculative as to be of little value. The only specific knowl­
edge of any significance that we do have comes from the New Testament
writings themselves, again thrusting the focus of attention back onto the
authors and their writings.
But no matter where one stands on the issue of where the meaning of a
text resides, Stanley's attempt to formulate a reader-oriented approach to
analyzing Paul's biblical quotations errs in its application of reader-oriented
literary theory. For such theories do not place any priority on the original
readers of a text over other readers. Even if meaning is reader-oriented,
there is no reason why we should focus on Paul's first readers. The reason
that Stanley does provide for doing so—viz., to evaluate Paul's rhetorical
effectiveness—is a good reason to pay some attention to Paul's first read­
ers, but it again makes Paul as the author ultimately primary while Stanley's
approach paradoxically moves such study away from the realm of interpret­
ing what Paul says. At the risk of overstatement, we might say that Stanley's
audience-centered approach to Paul's quotations is more appropriate for the
discipline of church history than it is for New Testament interpretation.
Therefore, despite Stanley's protest to this traditional scholarly assump­
tion, I would argue that the best way to determine the meaning of Paul's
biblical quotations is indeed to study how Paul interpreted the biblical text. 103
Yet this does not mean that the original recipients of Paul's epistles should
not be taken into account at all. As Stanley rightly says, "The whole pur­
pose of introducing a quotation into a piece of discourse is to affect an
audience in some way." 104 The original audience should come into view
insofar as they relate to Paul's intention. Surely Paul's perception of their
identity and circumstances—including their knowledge of Scripture—
would have conditioned his communication to them. So the validity of any
objection to the idea of Paul intending his audiences to benefit from the
original contexts of his biblical citations and allusions based on their
alleged scriptural ignorance must rest on an author-oriented notion, the
assumption that Paul meant to be understood. If this is a fair supposi­
tion—and it undoubtedly is—then it is unlikely that he would have know­
ingly made understanding his discourse dependent on recovering inaccessible
material. 105 At the same time, if one is concerned with the meaning of what
Paul has written, then Stanley's position that Paul sometimes overestimated
the reader competence of his audiences only strengthens the proposal that
Paul intended his biblical quotations as pointers to their original contexts,
advising us to study his interpretation of the biblical text in order to ascer­
tain the meaning of his quotations.
Even if one were to grant for the sake of argument Stanley's position on
the ignorance of Paul's original audiences, it still would not make study of
Paul's interpretation of his biblical quotations irrelevant to their meaning
for those concerned with Paul's intention. 106 Since standard exegesis focuses
on what Paul as the author meant by what he wrote, any information that
might shed light on Paul, his convictions, and his context becomes poten­
tially relevant, even if that material was not available to his original audi­
ence. We cannot claim that any material that was not available to Paul's
original audience in some way is essential to understand his original inten­
tion if he is to be taken as a skilled communicator. But such material can
nonetheless be extremely helpful for determining Paul's original intention.
That is why knowledge of Paul's thought from the entire corpus of his episdes
is potentially important for understanding any one episde in that corpus.
We can illustrate this point by imagining that we were to find authentic
original notes made by Paul containing extensive explanation of his planned
argumentation in Romans that he made as he prepared what he wanted to
actually include in the epistle. Such a document would obviously be very
valuable to us for interpreting Romans. But as material that Paul would
not have intended his audience to have access to, it could not be considered
absolutely essential to understanding him if his communication was com­
pletely successful. Of course, it is possible that Paul was not always com­
pletely successful in his communication to his churches (cf. 1 Cor. 5:9-13;
2 Pet. 3:16), as Stanley concludes in various instances of Paul's quota­
tions, 107 but this possibility only promotes the potential importance of
material that may have been inaccessible to Paul's original audiences.
Despite radical differences of opinion with Stanley on so many points
related to the historical context of Paul's use of Scripture, I completely
agree that "Paul would have known that the members of his churches
differed widely in their ability to understand his biblical quotations." 108
But rather than indicating that Paul was some sort of sophist quoting
Scripture without regard for its actual meaning in the hope that it would
cow the ignorant majority into submission—we have already found this
hypothesis wanting—I wish to suggest that Paul may have structured his
discourse to accommodate the differing levels of scriptural competence
among his readers and auditors. 109 The main points of Paul's argumenta­
tion in his epistles appear to be clear enough on the surface of the text for
the unlearned yet attentive auditor to grasp. 110 The most basic rhetorical
significance of the quotations is often clear, usually providing support for
111
Paul's statements. But the more familiar an individual was with Scrip­
ture, the better he would have understood Paul. Recognizing that various
readers would have differing levels of engagement with his discourse, Paul
probably anticipated that those with less scriptural knowledge would gain
greater insight into his arguments as they processed them in community
and grew in scriptural fluency.
Our case study of Paul's use of Ps. 115:1 LXX in 2 Cor. 4:13 provides a
good illustration of this point. Stanley has demonstrated how "both the
meaning of the quotation and its role in Paul's argument would have been
fairly self-evident" to those lacking knowledge of the Scriptural back­
ground. 112 On the other hand, the learned members of the Corinthian
church would potentially have grasped the various meaning-effects we pos­
ited earlier, understanding Paul's point with greater depth and specificity.
They probably would have been impressed by Paul's faithfulness to the
basic meaning of the psalm and skillful application to his own situation,
rendering them even more open to persuasion by Paul's rhetoric.
Between the two potential extremes of understanding that might have
existed among the alert recipients of Paul's letter, there obviously would
have been a continuum of understanding that Paul could expect to occur
in his original audience. What I am suggesting is that, due to the depth of
Paul's engagement with Scripture, the individual members of the original
audience would almost certainly have understood Paul's discourse to greater
or lesser depth and specificity according to their knowledge of the Old
Testament background. 113 Paul would undoubtedly have known this and
probably counted on it. If his biblical quotations generally arose out of
serious reflection upon them in their original contexts as with his citation
of Ps. 115:1 LXX in 2 Cor. 4:13, then it strains credulity to imagine that
he did not hope that the learned members of his audiences would benefit
from their knowledge of the background of his argumentation. Hence,
since the goal of any exegesis of Paul's epistles should be to discover the
fullest most specific meaning of Paul's discourse possible, it behooves exe-
getes to study Paul's interpretation of the biblical text, which he claims as
the authority behind his pronouncements, as well as the original contexts
of his scriptural quotations and allusions.
But it is not even necessary to argue that Paul intentionally crafted his
quotations to be understandable to the varying reader competencies pres­
ent in his audiences to maintain both that the basic rhetorical points of his
quotations were understandable to the scripturally unlearned and that the
learned could benefit from knowledge of the Old Testament background.
For a moment's reflection will reveal that the main rhetorical points of
quotations in any type of informative/argumentative literature are fre­
quently clear on a basic and general level even without understanding of
the specific meaning of the quotations. Take for example my quotations of
Koch in German earlier in this article (see under II. 1 above). Suppose that
an English-speaking seminary student with no knowledge of German were
to read this article. I submit that she would be able to grasp the general
thrust of my argument as well as the main rhetorical points of the quota­
tions even without being able to understand a single word of them. The
surrounding discourse makes it clear that the quotations support the con­
tention that private ownership of Scripture scrolls was not rare in the first
century. Our seminary student might be able to guess that the first quota­
tion contains specific information supporting the point, and she would
almost certainly be able to tell that the second quotation articulates the
point in Koch's words. If one trusted my interpretation of Koch and
regarded Koch's words as the word of God, the matter would be settled.
Now I did not deliberately try to make these quotations understandable to
those with no knowledge of German. Indeed, I have presupposed knowl­
edge of German on the part of my readership. But the transparency of the
quotations' rhetorical meaning and function resulted naturally because of
the nature of this type of discourse. Moreover, the reader who can under­
stand German would obviously understand the quotations and my argu­
ment more deeply
It is therefore hard to know whether making his scripture-laden dis­
course perspicuous to even the scripturally ignorant was an intentional
part of Paul's rhetorical strategy. I tend to think it was, but the evidence we
have reviewed, the "irresistible pull toward more literate modes of expres­
sion" created by the written format of Paul's epistles, 114 and the tendency
of texts to form their model readers by requiring a certain model of reader
competence 115 all suggest that Paul assumed substantial scriptural knowl­
edge on the part of his audiences for the fullest appreciation of his biblically
oriented rhetoric. In any case, if we want to understand Paul's discourse most
fully, we would do well to attend to his understanding of Scripture and the
original contexts of his quotations and allusions. Yet I am not claiming
that Paul always quoted or alluded to Scripture as a pointer to the original
context of his quotations. That may or may not be the case and remains to
be seen from examination of every one of Paul's quotations and allusions,
making for agreement between Stanley and me on one more point—Paul's
116
intention must be judged in each instance on a case by case basis. It is
my contention that Stanley's approach to analyzing Paul's use of Scripture
is inadequate for doing so.
Christopher Stanley is an erudite scholar who has contributed significantly
to the study of Paul's use of Scripture. But his assessment of the reader
competence of Paul's original audiences and his related audience-centered
approach to Paul's quotations are misguided for a variety of reasons delin­
eated above. Yet even if most of the members of Paul's original audiences
were ignorant of Scripture, corporate realities and processes surrounding
Scripture and his letters in his churches would effectively offset this factor.
In the end, his respective audiences must be regarded from a corporate
perspective as scripturally learned. Consequently, the soundest methodol­
ogy would still be to investigate Paul's quotations and allusions as if
addressed to biblically learned audiences. In the wake of Stanley's argu­
ments, Paul's original audiences are, one way or another, best characterized
not as swine, but as diamonds in the rough.