The main purpose of this article is to draw fresh attention to a Greek
codex which has been in the ownership of Corpus Christi College,
Oxford, for about 470 years, and yet has repeatedly escaped the notice of
those responsible for compiling the standard lists of New Testament man-
uscripts. Although the manuscript has occasionally been consulted by
those who have been interested in the early history of Greek scholarship in
England, it seems to have received little attention from students of the
Greek New Testament text.
The manuscript in question is Corpus Christi College, MS. 30, con-
taining the Greek text of Theophylact's commentary on the Gospels, in
which (as is usual for manuscripts of Theophylact) short portions of scrip-
ture text alternate with longer sections of commentary. These scripture
citations, when taken together, add up to a more or less complete text for
all four Gospels. From the nineteenth century onwards it has been accepted
that, in principle, all copies of this work of Theophylact (provided that
they contain the scripture text) should be treated as New Testament manu­
scripts. Numerous copies of the Theophylact commentary in the libraries
of western Europe, as well as the monastic libraries of the east, have conse­
quently been included in the lists of Greek New Testament manuscripts
for more than a hundred years. It comes as a surprise to find that a similar
manuscript located in an Oxford college could have been so long overlooked.
In the early years of the sixteenth century, the owner of the manuscript
was none other than William Grocyn (d. 1519), who in turn sold it to Thomas
Linacre (d. 1524), as may be seen from a contemporary inscription on f.
4r: Linacrus emita vivo Grocino eodempretio, quo Grocinus emerat ("When
Grocyn was [still] alive, Linacre purchased [the book] from him for the
same price for which Grocyn had purchased it"). It was thus owned succes­
sively by two of the founding fathers of Greek scholarship in England. The
manuscript next came into the possession of John Claymond (d. 1537),
who was the first president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and who
later gave the volume to his college, where it still remains today.
The physical characteristics of this codex are briefly as follows. The writ­
ing material is vellum, consisting of a total of 335 leaves, measuring approx­
imately 29.5 cm. in height by 21.5 cm. in width. 1 The binding could belong
to the last decade of the sixteenth century. 2 At the beginning of the volume
are bound four leaves derived from diverse sources, comprising two leaves
from a tenth-century Gospel lectionary, written in two columns in uncial
script, followed by two leaves containing portraits of the evangelists Mark
and Luke, which seem to have been taken from an eleventh-century lec­
tionary. The Theophylact portion of the volume, occupying folios 5 to
334, is written in a single column in a twelfth-century cursive script. 3
This manuscript, which has never been included in any of the standard
printed lists of New Testament manuscripts, was missing from the two
editions of the Kurzgefasste Liste der griechischen Handschriften des Neuen
Testaments edited by Κ. Aland (Berlin, 1963 and 1994), and up to the year
2006 it had still not been added to the supplementary lists maintained by
the Institut für neutestamentliche Textforschung in Münster (INTF). In
consequence, it understandably did not receive a mention in either edition
oL4 Bibliography of Greek New Testament Manuscripts^ edited by J.K. Elliott
(Cambridge, 1989 and 2000). 4 Nor was it to be found in any of the earlier
lists from the eighteenth century onwards, in particular those of Wettstein,
Griesbach, Scholz, Scrivener, Gregory, Von Soden and Von Dobschiitz.
The reader may well wonder how this could possibly have happened, given
the undoubted zeal and careful scholarship devoted over such a long period
to the preparation, correction and expansion of the list of manuscript wit-
nesses to the text of the Greek New Testament.
It would not be true to suggest, however, that the manuscript has
remained wholly uncatalogued. It had its rightful place in the handwritten
catalogue of the library of Corpus Christi College, prepared in 1589. 5 It
was also included in the first printed catalogue of Oxford libraries, the
Écloga Oxonio-Cantabrigiensis of T. James (London, 1600). 6 The manu-
script was mentioned again in the Catalogi librorum manuscriptorum
Angliae etHiberniae in vnum collecti of E. Bernard (Oxford, 1697). 7 It was
duly recorded in H.O. Coxes catalogue of Oxford college libraries, Cata-
logus codicum mss. qui in collegiis aulisque Oxoniensibus hodie adservantur
(Oxford, 1852). 8 It featured in an article on the history of the Corpus
Christi College Library, published by J.R. Liddell in 1938. 9 It was displayed
in a major exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery, London, in 1977. 10
More recently the manuscript was fully described by I. Hutter, together
with several photographs, in 1997. 11 These references serve, if anything, to
heighten the sense of astonish-ment that a manuscript otherwise so well
documented could remain absent from the standard works of reference
relied upon by scholars of the New Testament text.
To be fair to the compilers of the older listings of New Testament man-
uscripts, it should be noted that all manuscripts of Theophylact were at
one time intentionally omitted, probably on the grounds that the scripture
text was embedded in the commentary. Hence the manuscripts of The-
ophylact's commentary on the Gospels were omitted from the list issued in
1751 by J.J. Wettstein. 12 In 1796, however, J.J. Griesbach ventured to assign
the numbers 154 and 168 to two copies of this commentary, using infor-
mation which had been published by A. Birch in 1785-1788. 13 During the
following century, in a piecemeal fashion, many other copies of this work
of Theophylact were gradually added to the list of New Testament manu-
scripts through the exertions of Scholz, Burgon, Scrivener, Martin and Greg-
ory. 14 Finally in 1902, H. Von Soden was able to draw up an impressive list
of 119 manuscripts containing all or part of this Gospel commentary. 15
Among the Theophylact Gospel manuscripts which Von Soden was res-
ponsible for adding to the list were four from Oxford libraries, comprising
two from the Bodleian Library (N.T. codices 2106 and 2107) and two
16
from the library of Christ Church (N.T. codices 2100 and, allegedly, 514).
He also identified several additional non-commentary manuscripts at Oxford.
According to Von Soden, codex 514 (Christ Church MS. Wake 30) con­
sisted of two manuscripts bound up together, the first containing the Gos­
pels, and the second containing the commentary of Theophylact, enumerated
ε14
respectively as his ε262 and Θ . This raises a problem, as codex 514 is in
fact just a non-commentary manuscript of the Gospels. It has been sug­
gested that Von Soden mistakenly substituted this item for codex 2646
(Christ Church MS. Wake 51). However, the latter contains the commen­
17
tary of Zigabenus, not of Theophylact. A more likely explanation of Von
ε14
Sodens error is that his Θ was originally intended to be Corpus Christi
College MS. 30, but that he confused this with Christ Church MS. Wake
30, owing to the similarity of the shelfmarks: this is borne out by the
dimensions which he gave for Θ ε14 (29.7 χ 21.8 cm.), which are very close
to the actual size of the Corpus manuscript, though he had a different
reckoning of its total number of folios (395 instead of 335).
Most of Von Sodens newly-added manuscripts from Oxford were sim­
ply assigned new numerals in C. R. Gregorys list of New Testament minus­
cules, 18 accompanied by the phrase "Aus Soden entnommen", apparently
without any rigorous cross-checking of the various library catalogues to
verify the completeness of Von Soden s data. Subsequent generations of
scholars, in their turn, made the assumption that Gregorys tabulation of
the Oxford manuscripts was complete, and did not consider it worthwhile
to go over ground which seemed to have been so carefully examined in the
past. The result was that, for a further century, the Corpus Christi College
manuscript would remain virtually unknown to New Testament textual
scholars. 19
It is good to be able to report that, in August 2006, the Corpus Christi
College MS. 30 has been assigned two new numbers in the official lists
maintained at the INTE The larger portion of the manuscript, containing
the text of the Gospels with the commentary of Theophylact, is now New
Testament minuscule 2879, while the first two leaves of the volume have
become lectionary 2436. 20
In this connection, when the next full edition of the Kurzgefasste Liste is
prepared, it is to be hoped that it will contain more detailed information
on the numerous manuscripts which contain a commentary. In the present
form of the list, such manuscripts are merely designated as "K" (for Kom-
mentarhandschrift), without identifying which particular commentary or
commentaries they contain, so that the user has to look elsewhere to ascer-
tain whether it is the work of Theophylact, or Ps.-Oecumenius, or Nicetas,
or even Zigabenus. Relevant information can currently be gleaned from
the third appendix of the Liste\ enabling the reader to convert the Gregory-Aland numbers into the sigla which Von Soden employed to distinguish
between the different commentaries. However, with regard to manuscripts
added to the list since the time of Gregory and Von Soden (including more
than thirty commentary-manuscripts of the Gospels), comparable infor-
mation is more difficult to obtain. The necessary details could be pro-
vided in the footnotes or through additional symbols in the "contents"
column.
In the year 1600, Thomas James described the Corpus Christi College
manuscript as follows: Theophihctus in Euangelistas Graece. In principio
cuiusque libri habes elegantem picturam ("Theophylact on the Evangelists,
in Greek. At the beginning of each book, you have a fine painting"). 21 This
statement, taken at face value, would appear to suggest that the manuscript
at that time contained four Byzantine portraits of the evangelists, one
before each of the four Gospels. 22 Since the volume now only contains two
such portraits, both of which came from other manuscripts, James' descrip-
tion might be thought to imply that the (allegedly) original portraits disap-
peared from the volume at some point after the end of the sixteenth
century, perhaps through the depredations of an unscrupulous art-collector
who had access to the manuscripts of the college. This could seem to pro-
vide an explanation for the absence of any list of kephalaia before Matthew
or Mark, and for the fact that a leaf is missing before the start of Luke, and
that before the start of the Gospel of John the lower half of the preceding
leaf has been cut away. However, as it cannot now be verified whether the
missing or damaged leaves contained any portraits, it remains possible
that James' remarks were merely an inaccurate description of the two
portraits which are to be seen near the front of the volume. It is interesting to consider the question of whether this Theophylact man-
uscript was ever seen or used by Erasmus during the preparation of his
Annotations on the New Testament, first published in 1516 along with the
Greek New Testament text and his Latin translation. From 1511 to 1514
Erasmus resided in England, and it was in this period that his preliminary
work on the Annotations took place, based partly on his consultation of
Greek manuscripts which were available to him in English libraries. He
does not give any description of these manuscripts, or any clues as to where
they were located or who owned them. In fact, most of the Greek New
Testament citations contained in the first edition of his Annotations can be
traced to specific manuscripts which he is known to have used in Switzer-
land, at Basle. 23 It is possible, however, to identify a relatively small num-
ber of Greek citations which are not supported by his Basle manuscripts
and were therefore probably drawn from manuscripts which he saw in
England. In the Gospels, for example, some of Erasmus' citations belonging
to this smaller category have a close relationship with the form of text repre-
sented by codex 69 of the Greek New Testament (the codex Leicestrensis). 24
It is further known that Erasmus borrowed at least one manuscript in
1511 from William Grocyn, the former owner of the Corpus Christi The-
ophylact. However, from Erasmus' correspondence it can be seen that the
manuscript which he borrowed was the Greek commentary of Basil on
Isaiah, from which Erasmus prepared a Latin translation of a short extract,
to send to his patron John Fisher. 25 Nowhere does he mention that he
studied Grocyn's copy of Theophylact or that he was even aware of its
existence. Disappointing though it may seem, careful comparison of the
readings cited in Erasmus' Annotations (apart from those which can already
be traced to his other known sources) has not revealed any significant
degree of agreement with the text of Grocyn's Theophylact manuscript.
Erasmus was apt to speak glowingly of his friendships with other schol-
ars and of the help which he received from them. For example, in his
Annotationes he spoke repeatedly of the two manuscripts of the Latin Vul-
gate which he had been able to borrow from John Colet, the dean of St.
Paul's. If he had received similar help from Grocyn or Linacre through the
loan of a Greek New Testament manuscript or commentary, we might
expect that he would have mentioned the fact.
From 1514 onwards, after Erasmus' arrival at Basle, he made consider-
able use of another manuscript of Theophylact's commentary on the Gos-
pels, codex 817, which he cited in his Annotations and used as a source of
corrections during his preparation of the Greek text for his 1516 edition of
the New Testament. 26 In this way the work of Theophylact became a major
ingredient in the formation of the Textus Receptus. Until 1519, however,
Erasmus laboured under the false impression that the commentary which
he was using had been written by a certain author named "Vulgarius",
owing to confusion caused by a misleading Latin inscription at the begin-
ning of that manuscript (based on Theophylact's perceived status as
archbishop of Bulgaria). If Erasmus had used Grocyn's manuscript of
Theophylact, it is less likely that he would have fallen into this unfortu-
nate error. 27
There is no satisfactory critical edition of Theophylact's commentary on
the Gospels. The edition by Migne, in 1864, 28 was largely a reproduction
of the Venice edition of 1754, which in turn made use of the Rome editto
princeps of 1542. The Rome edition is presumed to have been based on
manuscripts from the Vatican Library. In an appendix to the 1754 edition,
selected variant readings were cited from five Theophylact manuscripts in
Venice (codices 354, 888, 889, 890 and 891 of the Greek New Testament)
and one in Padua (codex 744, now in Paris). The Latin column of the
Migne and Venice editions, on the other hand, was partly derived from an
earlier translation by Johannes Oecolampadius (Basle, 1524). He had used
a single Greek manuscript of Theophylact, codex 817, the same as that
which Erasmus had consulted a few years earlier when preparing his New
Testament text and annotations at Basle. As a leaf of this manuscript was
missing for part of chapter 21 of John's Gospel, Oecolampadius boldly
supplemented his translation of Theophylact by two pages of Latin com-
mentary of his own making. A revision of Oecolampadius' work was issued
by Philip Montanus (Paris, 1546; Basle, 1554), who was able to make cor-
rections by reference to the Greek edition of 1542.
Despite their eleventh-century date, the commentaries of Theophylact have
often been accorded the same degree of respect as the writings of the earlier
Greek fathers. Based on the commentaries of Chrysostom, but at the same
time more concise and accessible, the work of Theophylact exercised a
wide influence. Because his work, including the scripture citations, was so
frequently copied, Theophylact made a significant contribution to the
transmission of the New Testament text. A more detailed analysis of the
nature and origins of his text would therefore be highly desirable. This
applies not only to his Gospel commentary but also to his commentary on
the Pauline Epistles. 29
For those who wish to pursue such a study of Theophylact's scripture
text, one useful starting point is provided by the series of Text und Textwert
volumes prepared by the INTF, which include test collations of most of
the available manuscripts at selected passages. 30 A preliminary survey of
the characteristics of the various Theophylact manuscripts was given by
Von Soden. 31 Further studies by J. Reuss and E.W. Saunders are also
instructive. 32 Fifty years ago, Saunders emphasized the need for a new crit-
ical edition of Theophylact, which would provide the essential basis for
further textual research. One hundred years ago, the same need was recog-
nised by Von Soden. The scholars who will dedicate themselves to this
important task are still awaited.
From one point of view, based on the principle of genealogy, it would be
easy to dismiss the numerical quantity of extant Theophylact manuscripts
as having little relevance in determining the original New Testament text,
as their collective value could never be more than that of Theophylact's
single autograph copy of his commentary, the lost (or yet to be discovered)
archetype. On the other hand, the comparative lateness of his commentary
does not in itself prove that the form of scripture text which he adopted
was inferior to that which is exhibited by manuscripts of an earlier date.
There is a natural presumption that, among the New Testament manu-
scripts which Theophylact consulted for his commentary, he would have
given preference to manuscripts respected for their accuracy or antiquity
rather than just any copy which came to hand. However, this remains to
be demonstrated. There is also the question of whether he adhered to the
text of a single manuscript of the Gospels, or whether his scripture text was
a compilation from a variety of sources.
Further investigation would be needed, to establish the precise nature of
the New Testament text which Theophylact used, its relationship to the
various forms of text available in eleventh-century Constantinople, the extent
to which he might reflect textual sources of an earlier date, the connection
between his text and that of Chrysostom and other commentators, and the
possibility of Theophylact's influence upon some of the non-commentary
manuscripts dating from the twelfth century onwards. Extensive analysis
and collation would be required, to classify all the extant Theophylact
manuscripts and to trace the inter-relationships which subsist between
them, with a view to identifying as closely as possible his original text.
Because of the manner in which the scripture text is interwoven with
the commentary, it might be supposed that a copyist of Theophylact's
work was less likely to harmonise Theophylact's scripture text with the
form of text prevailing in other (non-commentary) manuscripts. However,
it appears that copyists did sometimes attempt to do this, producing dis­
crepancies between the scripture text and the commentary. There is the
further complication that Theophylact may have revised his own work,
leading to its circulation in more than one form. Von Soden also raised the
question of whether Theophylact originally issued his Gospel commentary
as four separate books, in view of the large number of Theophylact manu­
scripts which do not contain all four Gospels together. 33 If that were so, it
is conceivable that the character of the scripture text accompanying his
commentary might be found to differ from one Gospel to the next.
Perhaps the twelfth-century Theophylact manuscript once owned by
William Grocyn will have some part to play in helping to provide answers
to such questions, and in helping to elucidate further the history of the
transmission of the Greek New Testament text.