The Parable of the Pounds (Lk. 19:11-27) presents a unique set of problems
to the reader. 1 First, it has been noted that Lk. 18:15-19:40 follows the
order of Mk. 10:13-11:10. In Luke, however, the Markan order of events
has been interrupted by the insertion of the Zacchaeus incident and of the
Parable of the Pounds. While the inclusion of the former can be understood
on geographical grounds—Jesus is related as traveling through Jericho where
the incident is said to have taken place, no such obvious reason is apparent
for the Parable of the Pounds. Why then did Luke add this teaching at this
particular point in his narrative? The question is all the more pertinent since
Matthew has a similar parable, that of the Talents (25:14-30), but related
to a later stage of Jesus' ministry: during his Eschatological Discourse in
Jerusalem. A comparison between these two parables, that of the Pounds
in Luke and that of the Talents in Matthew, reveals that aside from their
differing contexts, the Lukan version contains another peculiarity: it has
added an extra element, that of a 'throne-claimant' (or 'pretender to the
throne'—Lk. 19:12,l4-15a,27). This added element raises its own unique
problem: the throne-claimant, believed to be a type of the Messiah, is
apparently based on the life of Herod Archelaus, a ruler remembered above
all else for his brutality. Obviously, he is hardly a model fitting for such a
typology. Why then did Luke preserve this rather embarrassing motif in
his parable, especially when it is absent in Matthew? In this re-examination
of the Parable of the Pounds I will use the tools of context criticism 2 to
show how these two questions, the differing order of events between Luke
and Mark, and the inclusion of a type of the Messiah based on the life of
Archelaus, are in fact direcThere have been several attempts to explain the combination of similarities
and differences between Luke's parable of the Pounds and Matthew's parable
of the Talents. 3 A brief survey of these theories is necessary in order to
properly understand the issues. At the beginning of the century, some
scholars, such as Alfred Plummer, suggested that it is more likely that they
reflect two separate, albeit similar, teachings of Jesus, given on different
occasions, rather than stipulating that the gospel writers confused the
4
details of the teaching as well as its context. Indeed, who among us has not
told the same story or joke on two or more occasions, each time adapting not
only the presentation but also the details of the story in order to better fit
the audience before us? N. T. Wright may well be the lone scholar in recent
years to highlight that possibility: "It is highly likely that Jesus used such
stories like this on numerous occasions (not just 'twice', as cautious conser­
vative exegetes used to suggest). There is no reason whatsoever to insist that
either Matthew's or Luke's version was 'derived' from the other, or both
5
from a single original." But most of recent critical scholarship has all but
6
rejected this possibility, replacing it with various other theories.
Most scholars today suggest that the bulk of the similarities between
these two accounts is due to the fact that they both emanate from a single
teaching occasion of Jesus, 7 and the double attestation of the parable in the
synoptic gospels raises the probability that it finds its source in the historical
Jesus. 8 There are two main explanations given as to how the dissimilarities
crept into the two accounts. The first claims that the original parable was
preserved independently in the Matthean tradition (M) and in the Lukan
tradition (L), and that it is these traditions which are responsible for the
discrepancies between the two accounts. The second is that the parable was
preserved in a source common to both evangelists, such as Q, and that the
evangelists themselves, or various editors before them, are responsible for
9
the differences. Either of these two positions automatically raises another
question: which of the two gospels preserves the most original form of the
parable? Almost entirely alone, Marie-Joseph Lagrange has argued that it is
Luke, and that Matthew (or his source) is the one guilty of the most redac-
10
tional work. Against him stand the vast majority of commentators who
uphold that whatever the 'original' teaching looked like, it would have
been more similar to Matthews version than to Luke's. One main argument
given in support of such a view is that no adequate explanation, even a
tentative one, has been offered to explain why Matthew or his source would
have removed certain elements from the parable which are preserved in
Luke, all the more so since these elements were particularly fitting for Mat­
thew's context. 11 Thus, it is thought to be a more reasonable position to
assume that the Lukan version was expanded with a second and separate
teaching, that of the prétendant to the throne'. 12
In and of itself, this added motif seems to have little to no connection
with an assumed primitive parable, which I am calling here "the parable of
the Pounds/Talents", 13 the core of which revolves around a master and his
servants, as described in the following summary: on the eve of an imminent
trip, a master entrusts some of his slaves with his assets (Lk. 19:12a-13;
Matt. 25:14-15); these either choose to invest it so as to make it multiply,
or to simply safeguard it by hiding it (Lk. 19:16,18,20; Matt. 25:16-18); upon
his return, the master calls his servants to account (Lk. 19:15; Matt. 25:19),
rewarding those who made his wealth grow (Lk. 19:17,19; Matt. 25:21,23),
and reprimanding those who simply hid it away so that it could not even
collect interest (Lk. 19:24; Matt. 26-28,30). The additional teaching of the
'throne claimant', is that of the master being a nobleman who hopes that
as a result of his trip he will inherit a kingdom (Lk. 19:12b). However, he
is hated by his citizens who send a delegation after him to prevent his
appointment (Lk. 19:14). They fail in their effort, and when the nobleman
comes back as king (Lk. 19:15a), he has all the dissenting citizens slaugh­
tered (Lk. 19:27). 14 It is almost unanimously agreed that this motif is based
on the life of Herod Archelaus: 15 in 4 BCE after the death of his father
Herod the Great, Archelaus set out for Rome to be crowned King, just as
his father had done. Unfortunately for him, a delegation of Jews followed
him and, accusing him of unusual brutality, petitioned Caesar not to
appoint him as their king. Nevertheless, Caesar made him ruler over Judea,
but only as ethnarch rather than king {War 2:14-94; Ant. 17:219-339). But
Archelaus' ruthlessness, most typified by his ordering the slaughter of the
many Jews who were gathered in and around the temple during the Passover
celebration just after Herod the Great's death, for fear that they were intent
on rebelling against him, eventually cost him his position: in 6 CE he was
removed from office and exiled to Gaul ( War 2:111; Ant. 17:339-344; Dio
Cass. 55.27.6; Strabo, Geo. 16.2.46). Even from this short summary, it is
16
obvious that the parallels are too specific to be ignored.
As is immediately visible, this added teaching does not appear to con­
tribute anything to the main themes of trust, faithfulness, and reward,
which are so central to the parable of the master and his servants. In fact,
the slaughtering of the citizens at the end of the Luke pericope (v. 27)
17
seems to be totally unrelated to the actions of the servants. It is suggested,
therefore, that there must have been some ulterior motive behind its inser­
tion: the delay of the parousia. 18 A less common view is that it was added
in order to introduce Jesus' kingship which was about to be revealed upon
his entrance in Jerusalem. 19 Thus, it would have been one of these con­
cerns, or some other still, that motivated a pre-Lukan editor, or Luke him­
self, to rework his source. Two possibilities have been put forward as to
how this took place. The first posits that the basics of a 'pretender to the
throne' teaching emanated from a second parable of Jesus, which was sim­
ply fused into the parable of the Pounds/Talents. 20 The second suggests
that this motif was an invention of a redactor himself. 21
In summary, the prevailing view today is that Matthew preserves overall
a more original version of Jesus' parable, albeit itself not free from redac-
tional work. Luke's account, on the other hand, is further removed from
Jesus' teaching, if for no other reason than because in addition to some
initial redactional work, it also assimilates a second teaching, that of the
'pretender to the throne'. While scholarship is still divided as to who may
stand behind this other teaching, Jesus himself or some later Christian
redactor, all are unanimous that the fusion of the two stories is the work of
the latter.
But this view introduces a problem left unanswered by all commentators:
why would a Christian redactor choose the ruthless and murderous Judean
Ethnarch as a type of the Messiah, especially so many years after his demise?
If emphasizing 'delay was the concern of the redactor, whoever he may be,
there was absolutely no need to bolster this aspect of the Pounds/Talents
Parable by transforming the master into some evil nobleman seeking king­
ship against the will of his citizens. Some statement as to the unusually
long absence of the master would have sufficed, just as it is in Matthew
(25:19). Furthermore, more recent scholarship has called into question the
commonly held assumption that Lk. 19:11 even has any implied reference
to the delay of the parousia? 1 As Denaux has already pointed out: "The
historical consciousness of the narrator forbids him simply to confuse the
Jewish expectation of the Kingdom of God with the Christian expectation
of the parousia*Ρ Similarly, if the concern was 'kingship', it could have
been added just as easily without associating it to Archelaus, possibly the
worst ruler the Jews had had in centuries. Francis Weinert has stated the
problem most clearly: 24
Those who consider the story an allegory do so because it seems to imitate an impor­
tant pattern of belief reflecting post-Resurrection Christian understanding... But the
apparent correspondence that they see... ignores two of the story's most distinctive
features: (a) the dispatching of a hostile embassy... and (b) the emphatically personal
and brutal character of the ruler's revenge... What sense could a Christian audience
possibly make out of the image of a delegation sent after Jesus to prevent his earthly
enthronement? And if the nobleman in this story is simply an allegorical substitute for
Jesus, how could a Christian audience reconcile the ruler's vengeful treatment of his
enemies with the teaching of Jesus on this matter? If early Christians created this story
as an allegory, then they must also be responsible for introducing two important nar­
25
rative features which are allegorically unintelligible from a Christian point of view.
Few commentators tackle the problem, and the answers put forward by
those who do fail to convince. One suggests it has the purpose of bringing
26
verisimilitude to the story; another that it was simply for the sake of
27
irony; yet another downplays the slaughter of the citizens in the very pres­
ence of the ruler·, a rather gratuitous albeit grim detail, as simply their being
28
"cut-off". It is probably for this reason that one recent commentator
concluded that the "quite negative tone [of] the royal figure seem[s] more
likely to point to the boldness of Jesus than to Luke or the church tradition
before him". 2 9 Yet, as Joachim Jeremías has pointed out, "it is hardly con-
ceivable that Jesus would have compared himself, either with a man 'who
drew out where he had not paid in, and reaped where he had not sown
(Luke 19:21), that is, a rapacious man, heedlessly intent on his own profit:
or with a brutal oriental despot, gloating over the sight of his enemies
slaughtered before his eyes". 30 Whichever way one chooses to look at the
problem, one cannot be rid of this 'embarrassing motif. That is why it has
been preferable de le passer sous silence or to gloss over it somehow.
However, I suggest that a re-examination of the Lukan context of the parable
may offer us an important clue in understanding how this 'embarrassing
motif was originally part of the parable, and why it may not have been as
embarrassing as it appears to us today. Most commentators agree that v. 11,
the introduction leading into Jesus' parable, is a Lukan creation, implying
that it does not necessarily reflect an original setting in which Jesus would
31
have uttered even an early form of the Parable of the Pounds. That the
Matthean version is considered more original emphasizes this fact. However,
an examination of the historical and geographical context as presented by
Luke reveals that the parable is most fitting precisely at that point in time,
suggesting that it is highly unlikely that the verse is a later insertion as is so
often assumed.
32
In Lk. 19:11, we read that the Parable of the Pounds was given imme­
diately after the Zacchaeus incident. This has led some commentators to
33
suggest that Jesus is considered to be still in Jericho, possibly even in Zac­
34
chaeus' home. Others have put more emphasis on the verse's clause δια
το έγγυς είναι Ιερουσαλήμ αυτόν ("because he was near Jerusalem"), claiming
only that the setting is said to be at some point before the arrival of the
traveling companions to Jerusalem. 35 What is certain is that this is the last
event in Luke's recounting of Jesus' pilgrimage to Jerusalem (Lk. 9:51-19:28).
It seems that the best way to understand the progression of events is that
Jesus had finished his visit with Zacchaeus and had set out on the last leg
of his journey. 36 With Jerusalem being less than twenty kilometers from
Jericho, the traveling companions would arrive before nightfall. It is as
they set out that Luke has Jesus giving the Parable of the Pounds.
We have seen how it has been suggested that this parable should be
understood as a reworking of an early version of the Parable of the Talents
combined with a second element, commonly called the 'pretender to the
throne', which includes a motif based on the life of Archelaus. It is pre­
cisely this added element which has a special historical connection to Jericho.
We learn from Josephus that after Archelaus was appointed ethnarch, he
built for himself a city in the vicinity of Jericho, naming it after himself
{Ant. 17:340). The city of Archelais has been identified with Khirbet el-
Beiyudat, some twelve kilometers north of Jericho. 37 The archaeology of
the site is consistent with the claims of Josephus. 38 After Archelaus was
deposed, the city was passed on to Salome, sister of Herod the Great, then
to Julia (the emperor's wife) and finally to the Roman emperor himself. 39
After it was burnt to the ground during the Great Revolt in 66 or 67 CE,
and a Roman garrison established nearby, it was gradually resettled until its
destruction by an earthquake in 343 CE. 4 0 It is not difficult to see how,
during the first half of the first century CE, the memory of this despotic
ruler would have been recalled by travelers as they made their way down
the Jordan Valley en route to Jericho. However, should Jesus and his disciples
have arrived from Perea as intimated by Mk. 10:1, it seems unlikely that
they would have walked by this city before their entrance into Jericho. 41
From the same passage in Josephus, we learn that Archelaus also rebuilt
Herod the Great's palace in Jericho. 42 Situated at the southern extremity of
the city on the banks of the Wadi Qelt, this palace complex has long been
identified as Tulul abu al-'AUyiq. The more recent excavations by Ehud
Netzer have helped clarify the stratigraphy of the various palace complexes,
both confirming and expanding what could be gathered from the historical
sources, mainly Josephus. 43 Of particular interest for our purposes, there is
direct evidence of the destruction of Herod's palaces right after his death
(4 BCE), as well as of Archelaus' repairs and use of Herod's Third Palace
complex (Zone B). It continued to be used during the first half of the first
century CE, and was even expanded, until the buildings were destroyed by an
earthquake in 48 CE, more than twenty years before the fall of Jerusalem. 44
In the opinion of the excavator, the ruined palaces were abandoned, only
be to very sparsely reused by local squatters. 45 By the end of the first cen­
tury CE, a Roman villa was built over some of the ruins at its western
extremity. 46
The ancient road from Jericho to Jerusalem passed just south of this
enormous palace complex, and as it makes its way up into the hills of the
Judean Wilderness, it offers the travelers quite an impressive view of this
royal estate. 47 Thus, as they exited the city on their way to Jerusalem, Jew­
ish pilgrims at the end of the Second Temple Period were reminded of their
last non-Roman ruler over Judea. Most interesting is that this corresponds
exactly with where Luke has Jesus sharing the Parable of the Pounds. Could
it be that this Herodian palace complex, last renovated and used by Arche-
laus but still standing in Jesus' day, triggered the Archelaus motif we find
in the Parable of the Pounds? 48
Should such be the case, this would resolve the problems raised by this
'embarrassing motif of Jesus being compared to Archelaus. One can easily
imagine Jesus and his disciples, still accompanied by the crowd escorting
him out of the city, passing by these magnificent palaces and recalling, in
thought if not in words, the history of the last local ruler who ruled in
Jerusalem before the Roman procurators took over. And in light of the
events that had just transpired in Jericho, together with the anticipation of
an imminent arrival in Jerusalem, believed as it was by the disciples and
others that it would usher in the Kingdom of God, a new era of Jewish
rule, it is no surprise that there would have been much excitement and
anticipation in the crowd. And this is exactly what is intimated in v. 11.
What else could be more fitting for the present hiatus in the Jewish political
scene, itself coming after an unprecedented moral degradation of its lead­
ers, culminating with the brutal reign of the Herodian dynasty, than for it
to be succeeded by the establishment of the long-awaited Messianic rule?
How could the sight of the Herodian palaces not evoke such thoughts? To
correct these false expectations, Jesus launches into a parable, using as his
teaching tool his immediate surroundings, the 'stuff' of everyday life, as is
so customary in Jesus' teachings as in Jewish parables (Ε ,ι ?ϋθ). Should this
indeed be the actual setting for the giving of the parable, the brutality of
Archelaus would no longer be a part of some allegory on the character of
the Messiah, but merely part of the circumstantial setting which Jesus used
in crafting his parable to more effectively communicate his message. This
would have been immediately obvious to his audience, even if Jesus used
Archelaus' cruelty very graphically to make a point about the Kingdom of
God. 49 Should this be the background for the Archelaus motif, instead of
being embarrassing, it is rather very poignant.
In fact, not only does this create a very probable scenario for the pro­
nouncement of the Parable of the Pounds, this aspect of verisimilitude
with Archelaus' reign fits only at this point in the history of the parable's
transmission. Already by Jesus' day, Archelaus had been irrelevant to the
Judean political scene for some twenty years. Haifa generation had passed
since his demise. Nor was his rule something that the Jews looked back
upon with nostalgia: they were certainly not interested in keeping his
memory alive as an example for their hopes of a future restored Jewish
state. Add to that an additional twenty years, a rough estimation of the
minimum time one can assume passed before the gospel traditions were
being committed to writing, 50 and by then Archelaus is a full generation
removed. 51 Already when dealing with his contemporaries, it is difficult to
grasp what purpose a redactor might have found in alluding to him as a
type of the Messiah. How much more so to an audience who never knew
him! Even if he had in mind some kind of mnemonic device to trigger
bringing the defunct ruler to mind as the parable motif, the more time one
allows to elapse between Archelaus' demise and the composition of the
gospel, the fewer of these triggers remain. Even the Jericho palaces, which
fit the Lukan context so well and which were still standing in Jesus' day, are
by then already destroyed. 52 They could hardly have served a redactor for
his audience which at best knew only of their ruins, if they were familiar
with the area at all. 53 Thus, if we are to allow the Herodian Palaces to be
the motivation behind an Archelaus motif, a possibility which Lk. 19:11
allows us to entertain, it fits best, if not only, when it is attributed to Jesus,
precisely as he is leaving Jericho.
Should this reconstruction of the events be accurate, we have no choice
but to reject the assumption that Lk. 19:11 is entirely a Lukan creation. 54
This is not to deny that the verse betrays a Lukan hand, 55 but to affirm that
at a minimum some of its content was integral to Luke's source. 56 Simi­
larly, the suggestion that Luke, or some pre-Lukan editor, redacted an early
version of the Parable of the Pounds/Talents to then insert it into the
account of Jesus' pilgrimage up to Jerusalem, is equally untenable. First of
all, it must be noted that if it indeed was an insertion, it apparently resulted
in relocating the healing of the blind man: both Matthew (20:29-34) and
Mark (10:46-52) place that incident at the exit of Jericho, while in Luke it
is said to have happened upon entering Jericho (18:35-43). 57 According to
the two-source theory (Mark and Q), this would imply that the insertion
of the Parable of the Pounds into the Lukan narrative precisely at Jesus' exit
from Jericho was not arbitrary, but purposeful, even important enough for
the Lukan editor to contradict his source(s) about the context of the blind
58
man's healing: It is even more improbable that the Parable of the Pounds
is an insertion when one considers that those elements which make the
Parable of the Pounds fitting to Jesus' lifetime are no longer in existence by
the time of the text's composition. Finally, no satisfactory explanation has
yet to be offered as to why a Christian editor would have preserved the
Archelaus motif, let alone insert it into a redacted version of the Parable of
the Pounds/Talents, especially in light of all the chronological and theo­
logical problems it engenders. Rather, by considering the Lukan context as
integral to the Parable of the Pounds, one discovers a very probable sce­
nario for its pronouncement, one which is not only historically plausible,
even likely, but which has the added advantage of offering a satisfactory
explanation for the Archelaus element it contains. It is only by associating
the Archelaus motif of the Parable of the Pounds to the historical Jesus,
precisely in the context suggested by the Gospel of Luke, that we are able
to read the parable without contradicting what we know of the historical
Jesus himself, or of the early church's conception of who he was.
While this reading may offer the best way to understand the inclusion of
the Archelaus motif into the Parable of the Pounds/Talents, it raises another
issue. The Lukan context is only appropriate for the Parable of the Pounds,
and not for the isolated teaching concerning 'the pretender to the throne'.
Alone, this teaching does not seem to have any purpose in the Lukan nar­
rative. Francis Weinert has probably done the best job at explaining how
the story about the 'pretender to the throne' may have functioned as an
independent teaching. 59 But while he tries to show how this teaching may
have fit particularly well within Jesus' life and ministry, he entirely ignores
its role within the Luke 19 context. 60 He suggests that the story served as a
warning to Jesus' opponents who were still rejecting his impending kingship.
But this is not the situation described in Lk. 19:11 where we are told that
Jesus' disciples are eagerly anticipating the imminent arrival of God's Kingdom.
Therefore, in order to agree with Weinert's reading of this independent
teaching of Jesus, one would have to stipulate that either the Lukan redactor
made up an introduction for the teaching although in the end it failed to
be relevant to the teaching, or that he inserted the teaching into a situation
that did not call for it nor was particularly suited for it. Obviously, neither
of these seems likely. Yet while the teaching on 'the pretender to the throne'
is not suited for Luke's context, the Parable of the Talents, as it is preserved
in Matthew, could fit the issues introduced by Lk. 19:11, although without
the Archelaus motif there is no reason to suppose such to be the case. But
this serves to illustrate the point that although the Lukan context best
explains the connection to Archelaus, it cannot do so apart from the Par­
able of the Pounds/Talents. This suggests a most unique dynamic in which
the Lukan text would preserve the most original setting for the Parable of
the Pounds/Talents, while the parable itself would be the most redacted of
the two versions, at least if one is to follow the majority opinion of recent
scholarship on the matter. Similarly, it would imply that Matthew's gospel,
while having removed the parable from its original context and placing it
in a secondary one, managed to preserve a reading more faithful to the
original. Needless to say, this too is hardly a tenable position. Could it be,
therefore, that Luke's account preserves the most original version of the
parable, and that Matthew's is secondary? If this can be demonstrated, it
would be additional evidence in favor of the historical accuracy of the
Lukan context for the parable.
Current analysis of the two versions of the parable suggests that the
Lukan account has been expanded by the teaching of'the pretender to the
throne'. This is to be expected, since it is generally agreed that most often
a longer reading reflects additional redactional work. However, should the
Lukan context be original to the parable, the opposite would be true.
Unfortunately, few scholars have seriously entertained this as a viable alter­
61
native. The possibility that Luke could be more original is often raised,
but it is too hastily rejected without ever being thoroughly investigated.
The current view is based primarily on the fact that the Matthean account
is shorter and free from the motif of the claimant to the throne. Part of the
rational is that it is harder to find a reason as to why a Matthean redactor
would have reduced the parable than as to why the Lukan redactor would
have added the extra motif. 62 It is also hard to understand the relationship
between the two teachings, that of a nobleman seeking kingship and that
of the master entrusting his assets to his servants/slaves. Rather than being
complimentary, they appear to be in conflict with each other. And since
both can seemingly stand on their own, it suggests that the two have been
artificially combined in Luke. 63 But these reasons fail on all accounts. We
have already seen that the Archelaus motif is not required by the immediate
context, specifically Lk. 19:11, nor by the need to emphasize the delay of
nitparousia or any other theme scholars have discerned to be in the text. 64
In other words, while there have been no good reasons suggested as to why
Matthew would have reduced the Lukan version of the parable, the reasons
proposed so far as to why Luke expanded the Matthean version are not
adequate either. 65 Furthermore, if the themes of the two teachings are really
in conflict, to suggest that they were combined for the purpose of Luke's
narrative only compounds the problem: we have already seen that the adding
of the second teaching did not contribute to the goals of the narrative; this
would now mean that it created an additional thematic conflict as well.
Finally, when attempting to reconstruct what the original Parable of the
Pounds/Talents might have looked like, scholars who are not necessarily
agreed on this or that specific detail nevertheless all agree on the following,
that both Matthew and Luke preserve some of the original elements of the
66
parable. This only highlights how tenuous it is to identify which of the
two accounts is closest to the original, suggesting that the majority view is
based almost exclusively on an assumption about text length and an
assumed combination of themes.
For Luke's version to preserve the parable in its most original form, this
would imply that Matthew's version cut out significant portions of the par­
able, principally those pertaining to the theme of the 'prétendant to the
throne'. In fact, if the Archelaus theme in the Parable of the Pounds is
intimately connected with the location where Jesus told it, this is exactly
what one would expect to happen when the teaching is removed from its
original context and placed into a different one, just as it is in Matthew.
Without the geographical peg upon which to hang the Archelaus motif, it
ceases to be a mere illustration drawn from a specific occasion and takes on
solely an allegorical character, thereby becoming 'an embarrassing motif
on the person of Jesus. Herein is precisely the motivation for the removal
of the teaching on 'the pretender to the throne' in Matthew. This aspect of
the parable in Matthew's gospel could not be preserved without it being
misunderstood and thereby doing harm to Jesus' reputation. Thus, if one
wishes to continue working off of the premise that both parables stem
from a single teaching occasion of Jesus, it seems to me that this rational
for its removal in Matthew makes more sense than the reasons given for its
addition in Luke.
Should this be the case, the comparison between the two parables reveals
another interesting detail: having removed those elements which relate
directly to the 'prétendant to the throne', the Lukan version of the parable
is actually shorter and simpler than its Matthean counterpart, 67 suggesting
that it, and not the Matthean version, could be preserving the version clos-
est to the original. Two examples of how this is born out will suffice. In the
Lukan version, we learn of the slaves' efforts to invest the master's money
(or not) only upon the nobleman's return, yet the story lacks nothing for the
audience to understand the development of the plot. In Matthew, w. 16-19
only introduce that which will be reiterated later, and are therefore not
essential for a proper understanding of the story. They could be removed
without doing any harm to the narrative. It has been suggested that it was
the Lukan redactor who removed these verses and replaced them with v. 14,
the reference to the delegation sent after the nobleman to oppose him.
While this is possible, v. 14 may nevertheless be more central to the parable
than the Matthew verses it supposedly replaces: with its reference to the
nobleman not being liked by his citizens, the actions of the third servant
68
become more understandable, and his claims more plausible. Without it,
we are left wondering wherefrom the third slave got his ideas about his
master. It may be therefore that v. 14 is not only connected to the theme
of the 'pretender to the throne', but integral to the master/slave aspect of
the story as well. The second example is that of Matthew's rewards to the
faithful servants: εϊσελθε εις την χαράν του κυρίου σου ("Enter into the
joy of your master"—Matt. 25:21,23). These statements clearly spiritualize
the Lukan counterpart of receiving charge of cities, 69 and are the only spir­
itualized elements of the original parable which otherwise reflects an
earthly setting. 70 There is one other spiritualized element in Matthew's
account (v. 30), although it is considered to be part of an appendix rather
than integral to the parable itself. 71 But this appendix is fortuitous in that
it may be giving us a window into the modifications the parable apparently
underwent as a result of the removal of the Archelaus motif. Could it be
that when the violent scene of Lk. 19:27 was removed, it was replaced with
a spiritualized counterpart uniquely Matthean (Matt. 8:12; 22:13; see also
13:42,50; 24:51)? But this would have then added a spiritual dimension to
the punishment, one not paralleled in the rewards of the faithful servants,
so that for the sake of balance it was subsequently added in for the first two
servants. In addition, if it was him who removed the citizens from the parable,
he apparently transferred their punishment onto the third slave, thereby
rendering the second half of the logion (v. 29) superfluous: for the one
who has nothing, it is not that και δ έχει άρθήσεται άπ' αύτοΰ ("Even that
which he has will be taken from him"—Matt. 25:29), but that he himself
will be cast out εις το σκότος το εξώτερον εκεί εσται ό κλαυθμός και ό
βρυγμός των οδόντων ("into the darkness outside, where there is weeping
and gnashing of teeth"—Matt. 25:30).
When approaching the Parable of the Pounds/Talents from this direction,
it becomes clear that Luke's version is more coherent than Matthew's, albeit
not entirely free from difficulties. Denaux has compiled a list of seven
problems scholars have suggested arose as a result of Luke introducing the
added theme of the 'pretender to the throne'. 72 Yet while these are real
issues, none of them affect the internal coherence of the parable. In fact, in
some cases the alleged problems specific to the Lukan account are just as
valid for the Matthean account. For example, it is claimed that the presence
often servants at the beginning of the Lukan parable is odd in light of the
fact that only three end up giving an account to the nobleman. However,
having a group often slaves about to give account to the nobleman is con­
sistent with the mention of bystanders in v. 24: there are at least another
seven slaves present. In Matthew, with only three slaves present, one wonders
to whom the master is giving his command in the third person plural (v. 28).
Nor does the Lukan narrative lack anything by failing to give the responses
of the last seven slaves: at best they would only be variants of the first three.
Not so with the Matthean account: in some instances, where it is at
odds with Luke, the differences do result in harming the internal cohesive-
ness of the story. For example, in Lk. 19:13, the slaves are instructed to "do
business/trade" (πραγματεύσασθε) with what has been entrusted to them. No
such command is given to the slaves in Matthew, with the result that the
third slave should have been considered faithful, and not guilty! 73 Further­
more in Luke, even without the injunction to do business, the third slave
would have been found guilty. Rabbinical law teaches that when entrusted
with money, the surest way of safeguarding it is to bury it (M. B. Mes. 3:10),
which is what the third slave in Matthew is said to have done, thereby guar­
antying his innocence. 74 In Luke however, the actions of the third slave are
truly self-incriminating, for they were contradictory to his alleged opinion
of the nobleman. He is judged on that very basis, leaving open the possi­
bility that the nobleman may really have been a fair and just master, as his
actions toward the other two slaves suggest. 75 Lastly, in Luke the amounts
entrusted to the slaves are small and appropriately reflect the nobleman's
statement to his faithful servants: εν έλαχίστω πιστός έγένου ("You have
been faithful in a very little"—Lk. 19:17). In Matthew, the sums are incred­
ibly large, amounting from fifteen to possibly as much as one hundred years
of wages. 76 This being the case, the master's statement επί ολίγα ης πιστός
("You were faithful concerning little"—Matt. 25:21,23) seems out of place. 77
One of the arguments in favor of an added 'pretender to the throne'
motif to the Lukan account is v. 24. It seems to ignore that the first servant
who has ten pounds has been rewarded with the rule over ten cities, so that
his being given another pound is actually meaningless in light of his new
78
situation. However, this misses the point of the parable as expressed in v. 26.
The first servant is not being given the extra pound because he needs it nor
because he has been put in charge often cities. What happens to the pound
of the third servant is not directly related to the situation of the other ser­
vants, but to their actions. It is given to the first servant because he was the
most faithful with the pound entrusted to him, which is why the statement
relates it back to his having the ten pounds, rather than to his rulership
over ten cities. In fact, it could be argued that this redistribution is more
consistent in Luke than in Matthew. In Matthew, the first two servants
realized the same return on their investments (100%), so that there really
was not any difference in their ability as suggested in v. 15. Consequently,
the first servant is not being rewarded for his greater ability or faithfulness
with respect to the sum entrusted to him, but simply because he was
granted more to begin with. In Luke, however, the reward is truly com­
mensurate with the servant's faithfulness and ability. 79
This re-examination of the Parable of the Pounds leads us to the following
conclusions. The parable is not a fusion of two independent teachings, nor
even an adaptation into a new narrative setting. Whatever relationship it
may have with the Parable of the Talents, it is not a reworking of it. This is
supported by the fact that it is the omission of the 'pretender to the throne'
motif in Matthew, not its addition in Luke, that causes the story to loose
80
some of its cohesiveness. Rather, the Parable of the Pounds is a single unit,
integral to the historical context in which it is framed, a context which was
en vigeur only during the ministry of Jesus and accurately preserved in
Luke's gospel. While "[a] predominant interest in reconstructing the origi­
nal parable(s) has prevented most scholars from construing the Lukan par­
81
able as a consistent textual unit," those who did so were nevertheless
hindered in seeing its historical specificity by their assumption that Luke
had inserted it into his narrative. For this reason, the many geographical
clues inherent in Luke were understood as being secondary rather than
82
primary, literary rather than relating to the historical Jesus himself. Yet it
is precisely such a reading that provides the best explanation for the presence
83
of the Archelaus motif.
Lagrange's comments are now particularly fitting, and remind us that
84
the reading of the parable I am suggesting here is not new:
Luc n'a certainement pas transformé arbitrairement une parabole pour expliquer à ses
contemporains le retard de la parousie; ce n'est ni selon son programme ni selon sa
méthode. Et supposer une source antérieure ce n'est pas expliquer comment on est
venu à ce bel ensemble... Le thème n'est d'ailleurs le retard de la parousie... Le but
est de dissiper des illusions sur le caractère du règne de Dieu.
By crafting the parable with an Archelaus motif, Jesus used a poignant
reminder of the seriousness of one's position vis-à-vis the Kingdom of God,
no matter when it would be made manifest: "Jesus, the king-judge, will
bring reward or punishment according to the attitude that one has taken
towards him. This goes for his disciples as well as his enemies".