John 8:25: ελεγον ουν αύτω· συ τίς ει; εΐπεν αύτοίς ό Ίησοΰς· την αρχήν
δ τι καί λαλώ ύμΐν.
The answer which Jesus, according to John 8:25, gave to the Jews has at
all times been regarded as problematic. 1 The difficulty centers primarily around
the intended meaning of the phrase την αρχήν. Sometimes this has been
felt so strongly that not only the thought that the text might be corrupt has
been entertained but also the unique reading of P 6 6 has on occasion been
seen as a possible way out of the dilemma.
Before proceeding to discuss the phrase τήν αρχήν linguistically and
philologically, I shall note briefly the way in which it has been translated in
a number of modern translations and interpreted by commentators of John.
The Bible translations in general are divided into two main groups, with a
2
few translations that diverge from them. The two main interpretations
underlying the Bible translations are:
3
a. τήν αρχήν is taken in the sense of "from the beginning", and
τήν αρχήν is taken in the well-known classical sense of'at all' (όλως).
This may be expressed variously by "to begin with", "in the first
place", etc. The significance of these two ways of understaning the
text will be considered below.
If the translators have felt constrained to decide whether they should either
take the expression in its well-known use by ancient authors, or else try to
make sense of the phrase within its context, commentators, who have the
possibility to utilize a more discursive style in their treatment of the pas­
sage, present a rather variegated picture.
5
Thus, H. Alford, representing the nineteenth century scholar who was
steeped in classical learning, finds the chief difficulty in the ambiguity of
δτι and ο τι, remarking that "no sense can however be given by οτι which
will at all harmonize with the context". He also criticizes Lücke s interpre-
tation "Why do I speak with you at all" as "not only ungrammatical, but
most alien from the whole character of our Lord's discourses". He therefore
settles for ο τι (i.e. ο,τι). Next, he argues that λαλώ does not mean "to say",
but "to discourse", "to speak". Finally, he addresses τήν αρχήν, which, he
says, should not be taken substantively as the Vulgate [principium], Augus­
tinus, Ambrosius and Wordsworth, "but adverbially, with all Greek com­
mentators". 6 He goes on: "And adverbially it may mean (1) 'in the beginning, '
'from the beginning, ' but not 'firstly: ' (2) 'generally, y 'at all, ' 'omnino,' usually
with a negative clause, but sometimes with an affirmative." 7 Writing before
the age of the papyri, when the classical authors formed the New Testa­
ment philologist's comparative material, Alford cites a few classical texts
and concludes that the presence of λαλώ makes impossible the meaning of
'in the beginning,'οτ 'atfirst', or from the beginning'. Primarily on the basis
of the above considerations, he translates the whole text: "Essentially, that
which I also discourse unto you: or in very deed, that same which I speak
unto you". 8
J. H. Bernard similarly objects to giving to τήν αρχήν the sense of "from
the beginning" because the present λαλώ cannot be used in the sense of
"I have spoken at the beginning". 9 Bernard also objects to construing the
sense "How is it that I even speak to you at all?" (so RV margin reading the
relative as δτι) on the basis of Klemes of Rome, Homilía, VI. 11: ει μή
παρακολουθείς οΐς λέγω, τί καί τήν αρχήν διαλέγομαι; ("If you do/can not
follow what I am saying, why am I discoursing at all?"). However, he finds
it difficult to collocate such a rendering with what follows. He settles for
"'Primarily, I am what I am telling you as the [rendering] least open to
objection". 10
L. Morris objects that "nobody appears to have shown that the expres­
sion [τήν αρχήν] is used in the sense 'from the beginning'". He contem­
plates the meaning ascribed to it by the Fathers " 'altogether' or the like.
It is the 'at all' in our phrase 'not at all' " , n but thinks that this sense does
not fit the context. He notes difficulties with all the interpretations so far
suggested, concluding that if we could accept the unique reading of P 6 6 "all
would be well. Failing that, Hoskyn's suggestion seems to be best, that there
is a complication due to the double meaning in the writers mind". 1 2
C. K. Barrett thinks that the difficulty regarding τήν αρχήν has been
exaggerated. If the sentence is a question, "τήν αρχήν will have the mean­
ing 'at all' and δτι must be written οτι and translated 'Why?'—'Why do
I speak to you at all?'". This sense, he thinks, is possible but goes "so badly
with the next verse". Instead, Barrett prefers reading Jesus' answer as a
statement, "writing οτι as ο, τι while supplying εγώ ειμί" and τήν αρχήν as
'at first', 'at the beginning', 'in the beginning'. This, he thinks, would give
either "(a) I am from the beginning what I tell you" or "(b) I am what I tell
13
you from the beginning". His preference lies with the first option.
R. E. Brown mentions the various attempts at construing Jesus' answer.
He finds difficulties with them all and inclines toward the addition which
P 6 6 makes, rendering "I told you at the beginning what I am also telling
you [now]". 1 4
B. Lindars, too, mentions a few alternative construals but inclines toward
the paraphrases of RSV and NEB margin. He renders "Ever since the begin­
ning I have been what I say to you". 15
Beasley-Murray mentions six interpretations that have been suggested
and thinks that "all of these are possible" except for one, the Latin misun­
derstanding, which renders our phrase withprincipium (see above). "With
the greatest hesitation" he favors a variation of Bernard s view: "Just what
I am telling you".
Though not a commentator on John, the view of C. H. Dodd may also
be mentioned. On the basis of the classical usage of τήν αρχήν he declares:
"I take [τήν αρχήν οτι καί λαλώ ύμΐν] to mean 'To think that I am talking
with you at all' (or 'Why am I talking.. .?')", 16 a rendering that reflects the
rendition of the NEB with which Dodd was associated.
The edition of Papyrus 66 or Papyrus Bodmer II by Victor Martin in 1956 17
brought to the attention of scholars a unique reading, that, if accepted,
perhaps suggests the intended sense of the enigmatic expression τήν αρχήν
in our passage. Our text runs as follows: 18
JK(ÛH] Kda ελευοΜ ο^γτωι CY TIC e\
einen ^YTOJC Ο IC ΤΗΝ ΟΦΧΗΝ Ο TJ Κ
λ^λω YJKiti [πολλ^ exam nepj YA\GÛN Y
Those who have examined the manuscript inform us that the definite
article O (in ό Ίησοΰς.) is an addition made by the original scribe. Follow­
ing the abbreviation of the sacred name O JC (i.e. O'lHCOYS*), P 6 6 has an
insert mark and in the margin the reading eiJION ΥΛΜΝ. This would now
give the text:
και ελεγον αύτφ· συ τις ει; ειπεν αύτοίς ò Ις [=Ίησοΰς] ειπον ύμΐν τήν αρχήν δ τι
και λαλώ ύμΐν.
This addition/correction in the margin was regarded by Martin as made
by the original scribe, 19 and in this he was followed by e.g. Funk 20 and
Smothers. 21 On the other hand, Comfort and Barrett consider this addi­
tion to be not by the original scribe but by the first (of two) correctors, the
"official diorthôtês". 22
If this, elsewhere unattested, reading represents the original wording of
the autograph, it would give the following translation:
And they said to him: Who are you? Jesus said to them: I have told you at the begin-
ning what I am also telling you [now].
This reading and its consequent translation makes Jesus give a meaningful
answer within the context. If we could be certain that this represents the read­
ing of the autograph, there would be perhaps no reason for continuing the
66
discussion. Apriorically, however, the addition of P looks very much like an
attempt to ease the problematic reading of the manuscript tradition, although
this, in the absence of final proof, cannot be maintained categorically.
It is, therefore, still meaningful, indeed incumbent upon the New Testa­
ment scholar to continue the investigation into the grammar and syntax of
this verse on the assumption that the majority reading represents the read­
ing of the autograph and to see whether or not sense can be made of Jesus'
answer as it stands. If the outcome here would be along the line of the
reading of P 6 6 , then that reading might be regarded as a complementary
argument for its correctness. It appears to me that the problematic expres­
sion τήν αρχήν has not yet received a sufficiently thorough investigation 23
and that there is something more to be said in this regard.
According to the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae (TLG) the word αρχή in its
various case-forms in the singular number occurs some 61,677 times from
Horneros to the Middle Ages. 24 The word occurs in many and varied senses,
e.g. beginning', Origin, 'end' (in the sense of'edge', 'corner', not τέλος),
'first principle', 'sum total', 'authority', 'power', and 'office'. In the plural it
is often used of powers', 'authorities' as well as in the Biblical and Jewish
usage of'the [invisible] powers'. But none of this is of any special interest
for the present investigation. Our interest rather centers on a particular
expression, the articuUr accusative^ which happens to have been used in
ancient times often in a very specific way.
According to the TLG the articular accusative τήν αρχήν occurs 8,530
times in Greek literature down to the Middle Ages, while according to the
Packard Humanities Institute the same expression occurs 207 times in the
Inscriptions and the Papyri.
I have read all the instances in the Inscriptions and the Papyri as well as
more than half of the 8,530 passages sampling various periods. The results
were so uniform that I did not consider it meaningful to pursue my perusal
of the rest of the passages. Theoretically, there is, of course, a small chance
that the other 4,000 instances of τήν αρχήν might hold some surprise, but
the probability for such was judged to be rather minimal.
In the instances that have I checked, τήν αρχήν occurs mainly in three
senses:
1. in a very large number of instances the expression τήν αρχήν occurs
in the sense of empire' (i.e. the position and office of the emperor), 'authority',
'power', 'government', 'office' (of various types of potentates, as e.g. emper­
ors, kings, governors and generally aspirants to such or similar offices as
well as to other officials who receive a position of authority or leadership)
2. in a number of texts the expression is used in the sense of'beginning'
leaving aside for the moment the issue of the English preposition, i.e. 'in
the beginning', 'at the beginning', etc. or any Greek preposition (επί, προς,
κατά, etc.).
3. finally, in another very large group of texts the expression occurs
adverbially, in the sense of αρχικώς, άρχήθεν, that is, the fact that the
expression is an articular accusative is of no consequence, since the two
words have become a kind of adverb. This adverbial accusative branches
out to two uses, which will engage us below.
Of the three usages, (1) is of no interest in this connection whatsoever,
since our text has nothing to do with any power', 'authority', or 'office'.
Hence this material is left out of consideration.
Of (2) and (3), the former ('beginning') can be exemplified by a text that
is close to New Testament times, sc. Plutarchos (I-II A.D.), PeriAdoleschias,
509 b. Exemplifying the evil of talkativeness, this time by means of bar­
bers, who are particularly prone to gossip, Plutarchos relates the story of
the barber, who being the first to hear the news of the annihilation of the
Sicilian expedition, rushed to the city [sc. Athens] to be the first herald. As
was natural, this caused a big stir and people ran to the assembly in order
to try to come to the origin of the rumor: γενομένης δε ταραχής οίον εικός
εις έκκλησίαν αθροισθείς ό δήμος έπί τήν αρχήν έβάδιζε της φήμης. The
expression τήν αρχήν, as the preposition έπί and the context indicate, bears
the sense of'the beginning'/ 'the origin' [of the rumor], i.e. 'how it all had
25
begun , Another text is Loukianos' (II A.D.) imaginative Tyrannoktonos,
4, which presents a tyrannical father as beginning to act unjustly under the
influence of his son: καί προς γε τήν αρχήν των αδικημάτων υπό του παιδος
άκων προσήχθαι έλέγετο. "And it was said that he came to the beginning
of [i.e. he began] his wrongdoings being impelled by his son". In this text,
too, the accusative τήν αρχήν is governed by the preposition προς and the
meaning is 'the beginning'.
None of the above and similar passages are problematic in any way. The
meaning is clearly 'the beginning'. Our interest therefore centers around
(3), the adverbial use of τήν αρχήν.
The extensive use of the accusative to express such relations as cognation,
limitation or reference, 27 and extent in respect of time 2 8 and space 29 had as
a consequence that many such accusatives—particularly cognate accusa­
tives—froze to adverbs. Jannaris 30 quotes a long list of such adverbial accu­
satives, a specimen of which are: τα πολλά ('for the most part'), το πρώτον
('at first'), το λοιπόν ('for the rest'), το νυν ('now') (see also Act 5:38: τα
νυν), τα μετά ταΰτα ('hereafter'), τήν ευθείαν ('straight'), τίνα τρόπον ('in
what manner') and χάριν τινός ('for the sake o f ) . Among these adverbial
accusatives, Jannaris includes also the unarthrous αρχήν (in the phrase αρχήν
ου, 'on the whole not', 'not at all') as well as the articular τήν αρχήν. 31
It is important to emphasize here that since this particular accusative
became the equivalent of an adverb, it lost its accusative force. Therefore, the
construction bears no case relation to the rest of the sentence. This is an impor­
tant point, since it has sometimes been objected that the expression τήν αρχήν
can only mean "iniat the beginning", as a consequence of which the transla­
tion of Jn 8:25 as "from the beginning" has been seen as "ungrammatical".
Being an adverb, τήν αρχήν essentially means neither "from the beginning"
nor "in/at the beginning". The expression is equivalent to the Post-classical
adverb αρχικώς ('firstly, 'originally', 'primarily') and the non-Attic (used
seldom by Tragedians) άρχήθεν ("from the beginning"), both of which
have been frequent down to Neohellenic. 32 It directs attention to an earlier
point of time. The notion conveyed in English by the p r e p o s i t i o n s ^ ^ , at,
or in in the phrase "from/at/in the beginning" is an added notion in order
to make English sense of the construction. The Greek τήν αρχήν simply
says "[the] beginning" as a modifier, in the sense of something that is
related to an earlier point of time from the speaker's perspective. But
whether the action thus predicated took place 'in or at the beginning' or
started as a process at an earlier point of time and continued afterwards,
i.e. from the beginning', or reference is made to an earlier time when a
different situation obtained ('originally', 'from the beginning'), the expres­
sion as such says nothing about. It is—it seems—here that the problem
about which English preposition to supply in translation, has arisen. Once
we perceive that the adverbial phrase as such does not expressly include the
notions of'in', 'at', or 'from', but that these notions are necessary in trans­
lation, we realize that the expression in this respect is neutral and that only
the structure of the rest of the sentence can guide us in supplying the
notions of 'in, 'at', or 'from'. 33 But these notions are and remain transla-
tional notions not pertaining to the original as far as this phrase is con­
cerned. The Greek is complete as it is. It makes reference to a point of time
pertaining to 'the beginning'. The reader or hearer supplies the preposi­
tional idea according to the sense of the whole, i.e. as demanded by the
context. Thus, how this 'the beginning' is to be construed in a given
sentence depends entirely on the particular sentence and its context.
Whether τήν αρχήν is to be rendered in English by 'firstly', 'at first', 'in/at
the beginning', or 'from the beginning' (i.e corresponding to άρχήθεν or
αρχικώς) or in its other main use in Greek literature ('to begin with', etc.,
see (2) infra) is a question of context. Indeed, it is because this adverbial
accusative is not more closely defined, that it can be used in both the fol­
lowing ways:
1. as an adverb corresponding to the adverbs αρχικώς, άρχήθεν, which,
depending on the context, may be rendered variously by 'in/at or from the
beginning', and
2. as an adverbial set phrase that places the main action of the sentence
in relation to what ought to have been the actant's first choice of action or
reaction, which, by implication, ought to have obviated the action that the
actant now undertakes. This notion may be rendered in English by various
devices, e.g.: 'to begin with', 'in the first place', or 'at all'. If this were the
meaning of the phrase in Jn 8:25, Jesus would be saying: "to begin with,
why am I speaking to you?" or "That I am speaking to you at all!" express­
ing a kind of amazement at his doing something that he should not have
to be doing.
We have already seen that one of the uses of the adverbial accusative τήν
αρχήν is to express the English idea of'to begin with', 'in the first place', or
'at all'. Greek literature supplies innumerable examples of this use of τήν
αρχήν from classical to Mediaeval times. Here follow a few examples:
Herodotos, IV. 25: του δε ουκ ένδέκομαι τήν αρχήν ("I do not accept this
at αΙΓ)\ Sophokles, Antigone, 92: αρχήν δε θηραν ου πρέπει τ' αμήχανα
("to begin with, one should not attempt the impossible"); Thoukydides,
VI. 56,1: ουδέ έπαγγειλαι τήν αρχήν δια το μή άξίαν είναι ("nor promise
at all since she was not worthy"); Demosthenes, KataAristokratous, 93: τήν
αρχήν γαρ έξήν αύτφ μή γράφειν, ει γε το βέλτιστον τη πόλει σκοπείν
συμβή ("to begin with he should not have written the proposal, if he really
aimed at what was best for the city"/ "he should not have written this pro­
posal at all, if he really.. ."). 3 4
If this meaning of τήν αρχήν is to be contemplated for Jn 8:25, the next
question is: How is δτι (neuter of indefinite relative pronoun όστις) used
in our text? The options are:
1. δτι = 'that' (conjunction). This would give the translation: "Jesus said
to them: 'To begin with, that I am also/even speaking to you'" or "[To
think] that I am also/even speaking to you at all". Naturally, an exclama­
tion mark ought to mark these renderings, i.e. I am doing something that
I really shouldn't be doing!
2. δτι = 'Why?'\n classical times the question why? normally uses τί; 3 5
and indirect questions use δτι. 3 6 The first holds true of the New Testa-
ment although there is a tendency in literarily low-standing writings to use
38
οτι even in direct questions. In the N T there is no instance of οτι = Why?
in indirect questions; only one instance of δτι = What in indirect questions:
Act 9:6: άλλα άνάστηθι... καί λαληθήσεται σοι οτί σε δει ποιειν ("But
rise... it will be told you what you must do"). In order to express surprise or
disaproval ("why on earth...?"), in non-biblical Greek certain idiomatic
expressions are used, such as τί έχων / μαθών / παθών, and indirectly: οτι
έχων / μαθών / παθών. 39
Viewing our text in the light of (2) above, we may say, first, that, if the
meaning had been "To begin with, why am I (even) speaking to you?", it
would have been a direct question and as such should have required τί
instead of οτι. Mark, as we have seen, does use δτι a few times in direct
questions. However, John is not Mark. In a stylistic question such as this,
the two authors ought to be distinguished. Second, if the intended mean­
ing had been (1) "To begin with, [to think] that I am even speaking to you
[at all]!",—i.e. expressing astonishment—we might have expected either
έχων or μαθών or παθών. Third, the English ("To begin with, that I am...")
is much neater than the Greek for expressing such an idea. Fourth, this is
no answer to the Jews' question. Fifth, the following verse contradicts Jesus'
supposed refusal to speak. And sixth, the whole of the Fourth Gospel pres­
ents Jesus as often delivering long speeches to the Jews. All this would seem
to make the translation "To begin with, why am I speaking with you" quite
unlikely. It is, of course, always possible to argue that by his brusque rebuff
Jesus declines to answer the Jews' question, but such explanations are
always hazardous. Perhaps in the face of the difficulties surrounding this
interpretation of the text and in view of the evidence as a whole, we ought
to abandon this interpretation altogether.
As has been pointed out earlier in this study, the adverbial accusative τήν
αρχήν often occurs as a kind of adverb, loosely connected to the verb of the
sentence, giving an undefined temporal relation that may be rendered 'ini
at the beginning' or 'from the beginning' according to the context. Greek
literature of all periods offers innumerable examples of this temporal use.
The great majority of these instances might be translated in English by 'in
the beginning' or 'at the beginning', Originally as for example, Dinarchus
(IV B.C.), Frg, 2.4.10: και τους άποχειροτονηθέντας τήν αρχήν καί πάλιν
χειροτονηθέντας ("and those who had been voted out in/at the beginning/
at first and who were voted in again"); Sostratus Gramm. (I B.C.), Frag­
ments, la,23 F, 7:4: Σώστρατος δ έ . . . φησί τον Τειρεσίαν θήλειαν τήν
αρχήν γεννηθήναι ("but Sostratos... says that originally Teiresias was born
a woman"); Dion Chrysostomos (I-II A.D.), Oration LVI. 11.8: ούκοΰν
άχθέντες εις [το δικαστήριον] τήν αρχήν ζημιοΰνται ης αν έκαστοι δοκώσιν
άξιοι ζημίας; ("Is it not then so, that when they are brought to court,
first/in the beginning they are penalized in accordance with each one's
merit (damage)?"; Alexander Phil. (II-III A.D.), Commentary on Aristoteles'
Metaphysics, 16:18: οτι δέ μή χρείας τινός μηδέ πράξεως χάριν άλλα
γνώσεως ήλθον τήν αρχήν έπί το φολοσοφειν, συνέστησε καί άπο της
ιστορίας· μετά γαρ τήν των αναγκαίων τε και των προς ραστώνην τήν του
βίου παρασκευήν ήλθον επί τήν κατά φιλοσοφίαν ζήτησιν ("That it was
not on account of some need or action but for the sake of (acquiring)
knowledge (learning) that men turned to philosophy in the beginning/at
first, can be shown also from history. For after attending to what was nec­
essary and conducive to life, they began to seek after philosophy"). 40
The examples quoted above have been interpreted in the sense of 'in/at
the beginning', 'at first', 'originally . But there are also border-case exam-
pies where the senses of 'at first' or Originally are indistinguishable from
the sense of 'from the beginning', as well as clear-case examples in which
τήν αρχήν = from the beginning'. For one, Sostratos (above) could well be
interpreted as saying that "From the beginning (i.e. Originally) Teiresias
was born a woman" with a view to his having changed later to a man. Here
'from the beginning' and 'at the beginning' or Originally merge in mean­
ing. Explaining why men and women feel an attraction for the opposite
sex, Platon (V-IV B.C.) has Aristophanes explain their origin in his Sympo­
sion, 190 b: ήν δέ δια ταΰτα τρία τα γένη καί τοιαύτα, δτι το μέν άρρεν ην
του ηλίου τήν αρχήν εκγονον, το δέ θήλυ της γης, το δέ αμφοτέρων μετέχον
της σελήνης ("the sexes were three and such: the male sprang from the
beginning/originally from the Sun, the female from the Earth, and the one
that partook of both sexes from the Moon"); Xenokrates (IV B.C.), Testi­
monia 161. 12: ταΰτα δέ καί Ξενοκράτης εοικεν έννοήσαι θείφ τινί λογισμω
τήν αρχήν λαβών παρά Πλάτωνος ("It appears that Xenokrates, too, under­
stood these things through some divine reasoning which from the begin­
ning/originally he took from Piaton"); Archestratos (IV B.C.), Fr. 11. 3:
ούτος γαρ αύ έστιν εκείθεν τήν αρχήν γεγονώς ("Again this one was from the
beginning/originally therefrom [Syracuse]"); Aelius Herodianos (II A.D.),
KotholikeProsodia,3.1.100:εστιδ' ενΜεσογείωκαίΤίβυραπόλιςΈλληνις
τήν αρχήν γεγονυΐα ("In the Mediterranean region there is Tibura, a city
that from the beginning was Greek"); Justinus Martys (II A.D.), Apologia,
II, 6. 3: οτε τήν αρχήν δι' αύτοΰ πάντα έκτισε και έκόσμησε should obvi­
ously be understood as "when he created and ordered all things from the
beginning"—given the Christian doctrine that creation has been disturbed
through sin, Justin's meaning must refer to creation's original state, and
hence 'from the beginning' not 'at the beginning'. In Rhetorica Anonyma
(early Byzantine times?), III. 571, we read: οιμαι δέ, ως τά τοιαύτα
προοίμια παρεισέδυσαν τήν αρχήν έν τοις λογογραφήμασιν. Here it is
implied that the proemia are still in the 'prose writings' ("And I think
that such proemia intruded from the beginning/originally in prose works
41
[and they are still there!]").
To appreciate the problem here, it is necessary to point out that 'from
the beginning' may be used in two distinct senses:
1. averring continuity, i.e. something that began 'in the beginning' still
occurs. This is often indicated implicitly by the contingencies of the con­
text, as e.g. RhetoricaAnonyma III. 571 and Pseudo-Ploutarchos (I-II A.D.),
Peri Mousikes, 1140 c (above), and above all by the use of α π ό . . . εως...
Thus, in the History of Alexander the Great 1.4, the Mediaeval author writes:
το πώς έγεννήθην καί άναθράφην καί το πώς ειχεν τήν άνδρείαν καί τήν
μάθησιν καί τήν χαραν από τήν αρχήν εως το τέλος ("how he was born
and reared and how he had his manliness, learning and )oy from the begin­
ning to the end"). 4 2 The equivalent classical expression (which is also Neo­
hellenic, esp. Katharevousd) for από τήν αρχήν is έξ αρχής. The N T
equivalent is found in e.g. Mt 24:21: οία ου γέγονεν απ' αρχής κόσμου εως
του νυν, and
2. averring discontinuity, i.e. something that occurred 'in the beginning'
which is discontinued. No particular marker for discontinuity is used: the
context is sufficient to signal it. This can be exemplified by Mt 19:8, where
Jesus says to the Pharisees: Μωϋσης προς τήν σκληροκαρδίαν υμών έπέτρεψεν
ύμΐν άπολΰσαι τάς γυναίκας υ μ ώ ν απ' αρχής δέ ου γέγονεν οΰτως 43
("Moses allowed you to divorce your wives on account of your hardheart-
edness, but from the beginning it was not so". Here, if in place of'from the
beginning', we substituted 'originally, 'at first', or 'in the beginning', the
sense would still be the same! We see, therefore, that in some cases, par­
ticularly in less exact, technical writing, 'in the beginning', 'originally etc.
and from the beginning' can be interchangeable expressions.
It might be objected that (2), where 'in the beginning', 'originally, and
'from the beginning' function as equivalents, would be more readily appli­
cable to Jn 8:25, whereas the continuity that Jn 8:25 presupposes, demands
(1) (i.e. both ideas άπό and εως). This objection has overlooked an impor­
tant fact. In the New Testament, the expression απ' άρχής/έξ αρχής to
which the idiomatic adverbial accusative τήν αρχήν is equivalent, occurs
both in contexts that aver (1) continuity as well as in contexts that aver (2)
discontinuity. Thus, for (1), which avers continuity, see Jn 6:64: ήδει γαρ
έξ αρχής ό Ίησοΰς τίνες εισίν (Jesus has known and continues to know);
8:44: εκείνος [sc. ό διάβολος] άνθρωποκτόνος ην άπ' αρχής (i.e. he was and
continues to be a murderer of humans); 15:27: καί ύμείς δέ μαρτυρείτε,
οτι άπ' αρχής μετ' έμοΰ έστε ("you have been with me from the begin­
ning"). 44 Similarly, in Jn 8:25 the context demands that Jesus' original
witness to himself is still obtaining (i.e. "what I have been saying/speaking
from the beginning"). For (2), which avers discontinuity, see Mk 10:6: άπο
δέ αρχής κτίσεως αρσεν καί θήλυ έποίησεν αυτούς (no continuity of cre­
ation is here implied); Lk 1:2: καθώς παρέδωσαν οι άπ' αρχής αύτόπται
(their eye-witnessing is limited to what they saw in the beginning); Jn
16:4: ταΰτα δέ έξ αρχής ουκ ειπον (no continuity with the present). Fur­
ther: 1 Jn 2:24: ύμείς δ ήκούσατε άπ' αρχής ("what you heard from/at the
beginning"; again, no continuity) (so, too, 3:11); 2 Jn 5: ην εϊχομεν άπ'
αρχής; 5: καθώς ήκούσατε άπ' αρχής. In all these cases 'from the begin­
ning' could have been substituted by 'originally' or 'in/at the beginning'
without change of meaning.
Thus, no objection can be raised against την αρχήν meaning both 'in/at
the beginning', 'originally and'from the beginning' and being used in con­
texts that aver discontinuity as well as in contexts that aver continuity.
However, a proper solution to our problem must take into account the
meaning and function of all elements in the sentence. First, we saw, above,
that οτι should be read as ο τι (i.e. ο,τι) = that whichlwhat. This already
eliminates the interpretation "To begin with, why do I... I that I even speak
to you (at all)". Second, the present indicative λαλώ has been seen as a
hindrance to rendering την αρχήν 'from the beginning', which demands a
perfect, but this is a grammatical miss. The present indicative can certainly
be used of an action that began at some point in the past and continues in
the present, that is, it is equivalent to the English progressive perfect. In his
treatment of the present, Jannaris writes:
Jannaris exemplifies by Sophokles (V B.C.), Oidipous Tyrannos 1112: πάλαι
ζητοΰμεν which means "we have been seeking since long ago" and by Pla­
ton, Kratylos, 428 d: θαυμάζω καί αυτός πάλαι τήν έμαυτοΰ σοφίαν, which
means "I myself have long been admiring my own wisdom". 46 Other exam­
ples, using άρχήθεν, are: Aischylos (VI-V B.C.), Fr., 44 a 758 b. 2: άρχήθεν
ποιηται λέγουσιν ("poets have been saying from the beginning"); Herodo-
tos (V B.C.), I. 131: τούτοισι μέν δή θύουσι μούνοισι άρχήθεν ("only to
these have they been sacrificing from the beginning"); In all these cases the
present verbs are used to express an idea that is 'progressive', i.e. an ongo­
ing action that began in the past. 47 This is rendered in English by the pro­
gressive perfect 'have been...' The NewTestament is not without its examples:
2 Cor 12:19: πάλαι δοκείτε 48 ("since long ago you have been thinking"). 49
We must, then, conclude, that την αρχήν λαλώ means "I have been speak­
ing from the beginning". Before we setde for a final translation for the entire
sentence, we need to examine two more issues: (1) the function of the con­
junction καί and (2) why τήν αρχήν is not placed at the end of the sentence.
1. The conjunction καί. The addition of καί may appear strange. Cer­
tainly, τήν αρχήν ο τι λαλώ ύμΐν would have been sufficient as an answer
to the Jews' question, but only just about sufficient. The force of καί is to
emphasize the connection between the identity of Jesus and the witness
which he has been bearing to it. The identity of Jesus is conveyed by an
implicit Τ am'. The καί—which connects this implicit Ί am' with λαλώ—
adds depth to Jesus' answer. Without it, Jesus' answer would have been
rather flat and prosaic. The meaning, then, is: "[I am] precisely (this is the
50
force of καί!) what I have been saying to you.. ."
c
2. The position of την αρχήν. In English the phrase from the beginning'
usually follows the main verb of the sentence. The Greek use of πάλαι,
άρτίως, άρχήθεν, etc., as can be seen from the above examples, shows vari­
ation. We might, then, have expected that τήν αρχήν would have been
placed at the end of the sentence, thus: ο τι καί λαλώ ύμΐν τήν αρχήν. This
would have been rather colorless. By placing this strange, idiomatic adver­
bial expression, which though accusative bears no case relation to the rest
of the sentence, at the beginning so as for it "to stand out and to be viewed
on all sides", as a great critic of styles, Dionysios Halikarnasseus, would
have said, 51 Jesus puts added emphasis on his original message and witness
to himself, a witness that has been borne continually to them all the way
from the beginning (i.e. his first encounter with them) to the present con­
frontation. The translation then must be:
- "Who are you?"
- "[I am] From the beginning!—precisely what I have been saying
(speaking) to you". 52
With a retrospect on Dionysios Halikarnasseus' principles for beautiful,
effective and sublime composition, we may say that Jesus' terse answer
exhibits grandeur and dignity. 53
