I find myself increasingly enamored with Clifford Geertz s concept of thick
description of cultures, 1 especially as I read the documents of the New Testa-
ment. In part this interest emerges from my own feeling in studying these
texts that they exhibit an increasing level of complication the more I think
I understand them. These texts betray a complicated interaction of what
Geertz refers to as "webs of signification." 2 Three of the larger webs that one
finds in constant interaction in the N T documents include Hellenistic
culture (and particularly Roman Hellenistic culture), the influence of
formative Judaism, and the Christian experience, whatever that refers to
actually. These various interactive webs complicate our understanding of
various biblical texts, especially in the Pauline and Deutero-Pauline corpus
with the assumption of Pauls previous life within formative Judaism. At
times scholars try to determine which web dominated the others, though I
prefer a view that sees these various webs come to the fore, one in this instance,
one in another, as the argument of a particular letter requires. This complex
interaction drives the work of this article in that I argue that a particular
context or web governs the understanding of πλήρωμα at the close of the
prayer of Eph. 3:14-19, one which may or may not govern other instances of
πλήρωμα in the rest of the letter.
In the formative stages of my own training in biblical studies my teachers
ingrained in me a concern for the primacy of the dictates of "context." That
is, though the world of or behind the New Testament opens many avenues
of fruitful inquiry, in the end the literary context dictates the particular
understanding of words and concepts within a given letter. With this caution
firmly in mind, I intend to show that Eph. 2:19-22 serves as the primary
context of 3:14-19, that the prayer itself builds toward 3:19 as a climax, that
these two facts in turn point toward the Jewish Scriptures as informing the
prayer s climax, and that, finally, returning to the prayer in Eph. 3:14-19 with
the background of the Jewish Scriptures in mind, we find several comments
within the text that point to the validity of this thesis. 3
Almost universally commentators note that 3:14 picks up where Eph. 3:1
leaves off, with the repetition of "For this reason." 4 Concomitandy, we see
that the writer of Ephesians went on a long digression in verses 2-13 about
the nature and consequences of Paul's imprisonment before returning to the
prayer offered on behalf of the church. Many commentators emphasize that
recognizing 3:2-13 as a digression should-not lead to the conclusion that this
section has no connection to 3:14-19, but that 3:2-13 informs the prayer at
some level. 5
Yet, it seems to me that in an attempt to justify the importance of the
digression in the overall flow of the letter and its function as the immediate
backdrop of the prayer, the prior context, which I argue serves as the primary
context, does not receive sufficient discussion in connection with the over-
all aim of the prayer. This inattention to the full import of the context of
2:19-22 seemingly leads scholars miss an alternative connection with texts in
the Jewish Scriptures that illuminates the meaning of the final phrase of the
prayer in 3:14-19, "that you may be filled up to all the fullness of God."
Eph. 2:11-22 celebrates the new situation that the Gentiles enjoy as full
members of the people of God. Krister Stendahls insight that to become a
Christian means to become an honorary Jew applies especially here. 6 Thus
the people of Ephesus now share in the covenants of promise given previ-
ously only to the Jews. This leads the writer of Ephesians to develop the
metaphor of the Ephesian community as a temple of God, "...built upon
the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the
cornerstone... in whom you also are being built into a dwelling place of God
in the Spirit" (2:20,22).
It is this context, rather than the section running from 3:2-13, that serves
as the primary context for the prayer in 3:14-19. Several items point to
2:19-22 as the primary context. The aforementioned repetition of "For this
reason," serves as the principle indicator of the link between the prayer and
the end of chapter two. Additionally, notice that in chapter one the writer
oudines the blessings that the readers enjoy in Christ (1:3-14) and then turns
to a prayer (1:15-23). A similar rhetorical structure obtains in the following
section as the writer enumerates the benefits that the Gentile Christians
receive in Christ in Eph. 2:1-22. Given the form previously established,
one expects that the prayer in 3:14-19 to follow immediately upon the
description of the benefits to the Ephesian Christians; this underscores the
recognition of 3:2-13 as a digression in the second section of the letter s argu-
ment. Finally, the explicit connection of 2:19-22 and 3:14-19 appears in
the use of two word roots that occur solely in these two sections in the
letter: κατοικητήριον/κατοικέω and θεμέλιος/θεμελιόω. I will discuss these
and other connections further below. One should note that, the two word
roots that potentially connect the prayer to 3:2-13, άγιος and δύναμις, occur
so frequendy in the letter as to make them questionable as significandy co-
7
referential terms connecting these sections.
The writer of Ephesians wants to turn immediately to the prayer in 3:1,
but apparendy feels it necessary to offer an explanation of the nature and
purpose of the imprisonment of Paul invoked in 3:1. This imprisonment
somehow reflects the great mystery of Pauls call as one entrusted to proclaim
the gospel among the Gentiles, which he boldly did in spite of his trials.
Thus, the readers ought to maintain a similar confidence because Pauls
sufferings bring them benefit (3:2-13). Having justified Pauls imprisonment
by an appeal to the deep mystery of the grace of the gospel, the writer returns
to "For this reason" and offers the prayer recorded in 3:14-19.
Rhetorically, Eph. 3:19 serves as the climax of the prayer offered here.
Though not a widely contested point, rehearsing the argument for 3:19
as the climax of the prayer lays an important foundation for seeing the
relationship of this climactic point to an important tradition in the Jewish
Scriptures.
The structure of the prayer follows a fairly simple pattern around the ϊνα-
clauses, which Rudolf Schnackenburg notes "folgen einander in innerer
Konsequenz und Steigerung." 8 The writer of Ephesians begins the prayer
with a comment about bending the knee before the father, a metonymy for
prayer, from whom all fatherhood in heaven and earth draws its name. The
reason that the author prays for the Ephesians builds upon three consecutive
ϊνα-clauses, whose kernel structure one might diagram like so:
As Andrew Lincoln notes, by the time one reaches the third ϊνα-clause,
the prayer has gathered rhetorical momentum, so that the final request of
9
3:19b serves as the climactic request. The first ινα-clause (3:16) denotes
10
the content of the prayer while the next two denote the desired results.
The lack of coordinating conjunction(s) indicates that the final ϊνα-clause in
3:19 is not exacdy parallel to 3:16 or 3:18. Instead, the final ϊνα-clause intro­
duces the final purpose of the prayer, the summation of the two previous
ϊνα-clauses. 11 In other words, the author prays for their strength for Christ
to dwell in their hearts, leading to the empowerment of the Ephesian
εκκλησία to grasp Christ s love in all its dimensions, finally resulting in their
being filled to all the measure of Gods fullness.
Thus, so far we see that the author recognizes the new position of the
Gentile church in Ephesus as a temple in the Lord, built into a dwelling place
for God (2:19-22). Given this fact, the author then prays that this commu­
nity might ultimately be filled to all the measure of God s fullness. This
imagery of Gods temple filled to all the measure of Gods fullness leads us to
the next stage in our discussion as we notice important connections to the
Jewish Scriptures.
I want to follow a trajectory through the Jewish Scriptures, one that I think
the author of Ephesians draws upon, starting from the first (canonically)
recorded instance. The book of Exodus, from chapter 25 onward, presents a
detailed commission to build the tabernacle and its various implements and
then the enactment ofthat commission, interrupted briefly by the Baal Peor
narrative in chapters 32-34. After the construction of the tabernacle and its
various cultic implements, the narrative reports Moses' supervision of the
setting up of the tabernacle in chapter 40. When Moses finished all the work,
a cloud came down and covered the tabernacle, and the glory of God filled
(LXX έπλήσθη) the tabernacle, so that Moses could not enter (w. 34-35).
Thus, in the tradition concerning the first "official" sanctuary of God, one
finds that upon its completion, the glory of God descends and fills the sanc­
tuary to the point that even Moses cannot enter.
When we turn to the narrative of Solomon building the temple in Jerusalem,
we find nearly identical language employed at the time of its completion. In
the narrative of III Kingdoms 5-9 (paralleled in II Chron. 2:1-7:10) we read
that Solomon built the temple, made some new furnishings, and then
brought the ark from the Tabernacle to the temple (III Kgdms. 6:1-8:2).
When the priests set the ark in the Holy Place and then withdrew, the text
records that the cloud filled (LXX επλησεν) the temple, and the priests could
not enter the temple because the glory of the Lord filled (επλησεν) the tem­
ple (III Kgdms. 8:10-11; II Chron. 7:1-2). The striking resemblances
between the passage in III Kingdoms and Exodus is exhibited in the near
exact repetition of the phrases in Exodus 40, including the fact that the cloud
filled the temple, the priests could not enter (as Moses could not enter the
tabernacle), and that Gods glory filled the temple.
Within this tradition we find a powerful reversal of fortune for Israel in
the book of Ezekiel related to the glory of the Lord in the temple. Ezekiel 10
follows upon the opening series of oracles calling Ezekiel to his prophetic
ministry (chs. 1-3) and various indictments against Israel (chs. 4-9), perhaps
climaxing in chapters 8-9 with the exposure of idolatry in the temple and the
threat against the life of the idolaters. Chapter 10 forms a significant turning
point in the whole book as Ezekiel sees a vision of the 'man of God' entering
the temple—the cloud filled (επλησεν) the temple, and the glory of the Lord
that filled the temple departed (10:3-4, 18-19). The irony here is quite dra­
matic when one remembers the tradition traced up to this point. Apparendy
the climactic sin of Israel, within the priestly tradition represented by the
book of Ezekiel, pertained to the idols found in the temple, so that instead of
the glory coming and filling the sanctuary, the filling of the temple with glory
serves as a prelude to glory departing that sanctuary.
However, within the book of Ezekiel we find an important note of hope
in the final section of chapters 40-48 relating the eschatological vision of the
New Temple, New Jerusalem, New Israel. Of particular interest to this paper
is the section in 43:1-12. After relating the vision of the New Temple area, its
sides, and the measurements of each part of the temple, the 'man of God'
brings Ezekiel to the East Gate (43:1). There Ezekiel catches a vision of the
glory of the God of Israel coming from the east (43:2), which enters the tem­
ple through the east gate (43:3-4), so that once again the temple is full
(πλήρης) of the glory of the Lord (43:5). In the end, the writer of Ezekiel
envisions a time when God will renew his people so that the New Temple in
the New Age will once again be filled with the glory of the Lord, just as in the
days when the glory filled the tabernacle and the temple of Solomon.
I hope that by now it is apparent that there is a strong possibility that
the writer of Ephesians drew upon this tradition in his second prayer for the
Ephesians. The author envisions this Gentile church as now enjoying the
benefits of the covenants of promise, so that they become a dwelling place of
God, a temple built upon the apostles and prophets, with Christ himself as
the cornerstone. He prays that this temple of the community at Ephesus will
find itself filled to the fullness of God, just as the glory of God filled the tab­
ernacle and temple in the days of Moses and Solomon. In fact, the author
views the εκκλησία as a totally new situation, where the Gentiles become
full participants in the household of God (i.e., Israel; Eph. 2:12, 19), so
that in Christ there exists one new humanity (2:15). Given the writers
perspective of the new situation regarding Gods people, it seems probable
that he also envisions the temple of this εκκλησία as that New Temple of
the New Age, prophesied in Ezekiel. The author of Ephesians regards this
New Age as typified by the new relationship of Jew and Gentile in Christ, so
that their filling as the New Temple entails the fulfillment of the prophecy in
Ezekiel 43.
I have argued up to this point that the connection of 2:19-22 as the primary
context for the prayer in 3:14-19, coupled with the final phrase of the prayer,
"that you may be filled up to all the fullness of God," makes it likely that the
author of Ephesians draws upon the tradition in the Jewish Scriptures of
the glory of the Lord filling the sanctuary, which I just traced. I now return
to the prayer itself to highlight other indicators that point in this direction.
First, one should note that the first ϊνα-clause aims at Christ dwelling
(κατοικησαι) in the hearts of the Ephesians (3:17). In 2:22 the author of
Ephesians writes that the church at Ephesus is being built into a dwelling
place (κατοικητήριον) of God in the Spirit. This κατοικητήριον parallels the
ναον αγιον in 2:21. The Ephesian εκκλησία functions as a dwelling place, a
holy temple, to God. It comes then as no surprise that the writer wants Christ
to dwell in their hearts. More importandy, it seems this dwelling of Christ
anticipates the climactic request for the εκκλησία to be filled to all the full­
ness of God.
Second, tied to this idea of the hearts of the Ephesians as the dwelling
place of Christ is the idea that they might be rooted and founded in love
(3:17b). The writer here mixes metaphors based in agriculture and architec­
ture, using in the latter case the perfect passive participle τεθεμελιωμένοι.
Once again, if we look back to the primary context of the temple imagery
in 2:19-22, we find the use of the noun form of this word. There the Ephe­
sian author writes of the Ephesian community built upon the foundation
(τω θεμελίω) of the aposdes and prophets. It again appears that the writer
ties the prayer back to its primary context of the temple imagery as the prayer
builds toward its climactic element.
The third potential tie between the prayer and the temple imagery involves
the enigmatic phrase "the breadth and length and height and depth" related
to the love of Christ in 3:18. Various opinions abound concerning the exact
reference of these dimensions, since it is difficult to locate these four dimen­
sions together in any extant literature of the period. Andrew Lincoln pro­
vides perhaps the most thorough presentation of possible explanations of
these four terms. 12 1 would note here that Schnackenburg seems headed in
the right direction initially in his commentary when he writes that this phrase
envisions an area extended or measured on all four sides, i.e., a cube, even
though in the end he relates this to Gods manifold wisdom mentioned
earlier in Eph. 3:10. 13 However, a tantalizing option occurs in the context of
the presentation of the eschatological temple filled with the glory of the Lord
in Ezekiel 43. After the description of the glory coming into the temple and
the accompanying oracle (43:1-12), the voice of the Lord addresses Ezekiel
to describe the dimensions of the altar before the Lord. Here one finds all
four of the terms in Eph. 3:18 used as part of the description of the dimen­
sions of the altar: one cubit as the height (ΰψος) of the altar (v. 13), two refer­
ences to the base (βάθος) of the altar (w. 13, 14), the hearth twelve cubits
long (μήκος) and twelve cubits broad (πλάτος, v. 16). Thus, the dimensions
oudined in the prayer of Eph. 3:14-19 might refer to the sacrificial altar
as described in Ezekiel 43. If the author does refer to the dimensions of the
altar as a metaphor for the love of Christ, then perhaps the author intends to
point to "the sacrificial love" of Christ in his death.
Finally, the doxology that closes the first half of Ephesians, which many
14
note cannot be totally separated from the prayer, concludes with the phrase,
"to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus unto all generations, from
age to age, amen" (3:21). Here it seems we find one last specific link with the
tradition traced through the Jewish Scriptures. One place where God receives
glory is in the εκκλησία, just as he expected to receive glory at the place
15
where his glory dwelt in the past, whether in the tabernacle or the temple.
This reference to glory ties the whole first half of Ephesians together, as
several times in the blessings rehearsed in chapter one the writer mention
the blessings given to the εκκλησία were meant "for the praise of his glory"
(1:6, 12, 14). The praise of his glory where? In the εκκλησία, which is his
dwelling place, the place which his fullness fills fully.
The conclusions of this paper are that (1) one must pay close attention to
the primary context of Eph. 3:14-19, that is, to the remarks concerning
the Ephesian community as a temple/dwelling place-of-God-in-2:19-22, in
order to gain a clear understanding of the aim of the prayer that follows;
(2) Eph. 3:19 serves as the climactic statement of this prayer and must be
understood in light of the primary context of 2:19-22; (3) this connection of
temple and the fullness of God points us toward the tradition in the Jewish
Scriptures, which records the glory of the Lord filling his dwelling place,
whether the tabernacle, the Solomonic temple, or the temple of the New
Age; and (4) several remarks within the prayer confirm this understanding,
including the idea of Christ dwelling in the hearts of the Ephesian believers,
their being founded in love, the breadth, length, height, and depth of Christ s
love (drawing on the dimensions of the altar), and the fact that the author
sees God receiving glory in the εκκλησία.
If these conclusions are correct, they raise several interesting points in rela­
tion to studying this prayer within the letter to the Ephesians. First, one of
the difficulties related to the interpretation of 3:19 concerns the meaning of
the phrase "being filled to the fullness of God." Many commentators raise the
question, "Filled with what?" and draw various conclusions. For example,
16
Best thinks that this fullness is Gods love. Barth and Schnackenburg con­
clude that the phrase "filled to the total fullness of God" functions as an
expression of the perfection of the Ephesians, in the sense of the fulfillment
effected by God in the believer, the fullness of all being and existence they
will find through Christ in God (perhaps the fullness of existence, perfection
in God). 17 Hoehner s explanation is perhaps a variation of this, emphasizing
the Ephesians filled up with God's moral character. 18 However, if this prayer
links with the tradition that spans from Exodus 40 to Ezekiel 43, then we
find the answer to our question quite readily. The writer wants the εκκλησία
in Ephesus filled with the glory of God as his dwelling place. 19
This in turn has several implications for understanding this text within
the argument of the letter. First, the filling of the tabernacle or temple in
the Jewish Scriptures at one level signifies Gods legitimization of the sanctu­
ary in question as the place where his presence dwells, where people might
legitimately encounter God. 20 The rhetorical impact of this imagery upon
the recipients of the letter would work with the rest of the opening section
(Eph. 1-3) to build the confidence of the Ephesian εκκλησία in their signi­
ficance in the divine drama that reached its climactic point in the life, death,
and resurrection of Christ. As the prayer in 3:14-19 receives its answer in the
Ephesians' experience of divine presence, this mosdy (if not solely) Gentile
community will gain confidence in their election and ability to mediate the
presence of God to the world.
Second, the connection of the prayer to the sanctuary imagery of the
Jewish Scriptures allows us to see the centrality of the temple imagery
to the whole development of the letter. Rather than serving as one point
among several describing the blessings that the Ephesian εκκλησία experi­
ences in Christ, oudined in chapters 1-3, the temple metaphor seems more
central to the author s desire for the Ephesians* self-imagery. Thus, not only
should the Ephesians view themselves as a dwelling place of God (2:22), even
more they ought to understand that God intends this to fulfill the promise of
his glory dwelling in the New Temple recorded in Ezekiel 43, a promise
which they, as a community, experience. Furthermore, as they come to view
themselves in terms of the long-awaited temple which God fills with his glory
once again, this leads to particular actions. Eph. 2:22 uses the passive parti­
ciple συνοικοδομεισθε to speak of the Ephesian community "being built
into a dwelling place" of God. Ephesians 4 states that the Ephesian εκκλησία
takes part in this building process. Eph. 4:12 speaks of God pouring out var­
ious gifts for the equipping of the saints "for the building up of the body of
Christ." A few verses later we read that the joining of each individual member
to one another allows the body to "build itself up in love" (4:16). Given
the previous flow of the argument, this double use of οικοδομή seems not
so much a call for the Ephesians to view their work of ministry in general
terms of building a building (as seems more likely in the discussion in,
e.g., 1 Cor. 14:4, 5, 12) but in specific terms of participating in their own
construction as the temple/sanctuary of God (so also 4:29). Consequendy,
we find that the temple/sanctuary imagery serves as a central metaphor in
the flow of the letter by which the Ephesians should understand their iden­
tity and their work together as εκκλησία. 21
Finally, understanding the filling of the Ephesian εκκλησία in terms of
Gods glory ties this prayer to the end of the initial prayer recorded in Ephe­
sians 1. Eph. 1:23 ends with the notoriously difficult phrase, το πλήρωμα
του τα πάντα έν πασιν πληρουμένου. One of the several issues needing
resolution involves the meaning of πλήρωμα. Many scholars try to locate a
technical meaning for πλήρωμα in the Hellenistic culture, whether in Gnos­
ticism or Stoicism, or perhaps in early Christian circles, as a term used by the
22
authors so-called opponents. How-ever, a few scholars note that several
LXX passages (e.g. Isa. 6:3; Jer. 23:24; Ps. 72:19) view Gods glory as filling
23
the earth, or heaven and earth. Peter O'Brien goes so far as to write that "...
Paul seems to have taken up the noun [πλήρωμα] to express the Old Testa­
ment idea of the divine presence and manifestation of the 'Shekinah' of later
Judaism." 24 If the author of Ephesians viewed πλήρωμα in terms of glory in
1:23, then the use in both 1:23 and 3:19 remains consonant with the Jewish
Scriptures, which views Gods glory as both filling the whole earth (and
heaven) as well as specifically filling the sanctuary of God. The difference in
the letter to the Ephesians revolves around the fact that the glory that fills
everything now fills the εκκλησία as the sanctuary of God.