In the texts of the Novum Testamentum Graece (Nestle-Aland 27 ), the active
verb διακρίνω occurs eight times. 1 Scholars usually translate this verb within
its classical/Hellenistic Greek parameters, i.e., discern, decide; or separate.
With respect to the eleven instances of the middle/passive διακρίνομαι,
however, most scholars posit a difference between N T and classical/Helle­
nistic Greek meanings, usually justifying their choice by means of a semantic
shift that can be proven by 1) the form and function of the Greek middle
voice; 2) additional instances of διακρίνομαι in the NT; or 3) references to
post-biblical texts. 2 These attempts to distinguish the N T meaning of
διακρίνομαι from its classical/Hellenistic Greek linguistic environment have
led to a general understanding that this verb is a terminus technicus biblicus
for waver, doubt, or hesitate?
With this article, I pursue three interrelated goals: to describe the pro­
cesses that have led scholars to the conclusion that N T authors transformed
the classical/Hellenistic meaning of διακρίνομαι; to investigate how patris­
tic and medieval writers understood N T passages with διακρίνομαι; and, to
discuss the implications of my findings both for the interpretation of the bib­
lical texts and the translation and interpretation of relevant N T quotes in
patristic literature.
My research results can be summarized as follows. In the texts analyzed for
this article, there is little evidence that Greek patristic and medieval authors
acknowledge a meaning of διακρίνομαι that deviates from the Koine mean­
ing. If, indeed, a semantic shift took place, they show no awareness of that
movement. The transformation of meaning first occurs in translations from
Greek to Latin but, again, not as result of semantic development. Rather, the
contemporary standardized understanding of διακρίνομαι as "doubt" signals
the exegetical community's approval oí a posteriori conjecture, i.e., a reloca-
tion of the Latin translation is hidden behind the concept semantic shifi.
For some scholars who see a difference between N T and classical/Hellenistic
Greek meanings of διακρίνομαι, this semantic shift is proof of the power
4
of the gospel to form language. For others, it reveals the power ofpeople(s)
5
to appropriate and coin language. Most, however, posit that "doubt" evolved
naturally from one particular meaning of the middle voice that expresses a
persons inner attitude, i.e., "contend/dispute with oneself", 6 "being undecided
within oneself, or "being divided against oneself". These understandings
of the N T meaning of διακρίνομαι share certain features and presupposi­
tions.
Presupposition 1: The distribution of a special meaning of διακρίνομαι
acrossa vanety of NT texts testifies to Matthew s, Marks, Luke s, Pauls, James'
and Jude s independent (and for different audiences) adaptation of the
"semantic repertoire", 9 which suggests a unified inner-testamental semantic
development that transcends diverse authorship and literary genre, geographical
setting and time, to occur within a linguistic-cultural vacuum separate from
Koine GreekTM Consequently, the product of this development, a special N T
meaning of διακρίνομαι, can be confirmed by cross-referencing all instances
of this verb in the N T that seem to express "doubt". Whereas this approach
has many advocates, 11 it is problematic because it perpetrates a circular argu­
ment: 12 a special N T meaning is first posited for one or more passages then
proven by using other N T references.
Presupposition 2: A special NT meaning exists parallel to the classical/
Hellenistic meaning of διακρίνομαι. 13 The reinterpretation of διακρίνομαι
by N T authors, therefore, corresponds to their rejection of both its tradi-
tional meaning and common words for doubt that were part of the Greek
semantic inventory. 14 However, there is no literary evidence that N T authors
viewed common Greek words for doubt as semantically biased or reduced
such that they sought—and found—a more fitting rendering of "doubt" in
διακρίνομαι. With the exception of James (1:6), each author introduces
διακρίνομαι without further explanation, i.e., no author signals the reader
that the verb might have been infused with a new meaning. Moreover,
since Luke, James, and Jude use the middle/passive twice in their writings
(Acts 10:20; 11:2; Jas. 1:6; 2:4; Jude 9,22)—apparently alternating between
classical/Hellenistic and N T meaning—what criteria should readers use to
15
discern which meaning an author preferred in each literary context?
Presupposition 3: The special NT meaning, "doubt", is rooted in a formal
aspect: most plissages with διακρίνομαι have the noun πίστις or the verb
πιστεύω in the immediate context (Mt. 21:21; Mk. 11:22-23; Rom. 4:20;
14:23; Jas. 1:6; Jude 20-22). To many scholars, this proximity suggests a
relationship in which διακρίνομαι functions as antithesis to πίστις/πιστεύω
in N T texts. 16 However, this common assumption does not justify a special
N T meaning for διακρίνομαι. It also fails to explain why διακρίνομαι is a
more appropriate choice than one of the traditional verbs that is conceptu­
ally related to πίστας, 17 and why one must assume that N T authors use an
antithesis {faith—doubt) rather than the contrastfiiithfulness—dispute, espe­
cially if a given literary context supports the latter. In addition, it cannot
explain all N T passages that are said to feature διακρίνομαι s special NT
meaning. 1) in both Jas. 1:6 and 2:4 διακρίνομαι and πίστις occur within the
same literary context (1:3.6; 2:1.5), but only one of these contexts is said to
establish the special meaning 2) the context of Acts 10:20 does not have
words from the stem πιστ-; 3) Jude 22 is several clauses removed from the
noun πίστις (v. 20); and 4) in Mt. 21:21, the concurrence of διακρίνομαι
and πίστις is irrelevant because πίστας also occurs together with a traditional
word for doubt, διστάζω (14:31).
Presupposition 4: Standard dictionaries, léxica, and grammar books confirm
the existence of a special NT meaning of διακρίνομαι Because many scholars
support their assessment of the N T meaning, "doubt", with references to
Friedrich Blass and Albert Debrunner, Friedrich Büchsel, or Walter Bauer,
their entries warrant a brief review. 18
Blass and Debrunner simply state that διακρίνομαι means "doubt"; they
do not discuss developments that might have caused this meaning. Thus,
references to their Grammar do not validate a special N T meaning "doubt".
Büchsel assumes that Greek-speaking Christianity produced the new
meaning of διακρίνομαι. He posits that Jesus gave the Aramaic word Í7S
a new meaning, which was translated διακρίνομαι in Greek. However, Büch-
sel himself documents a lack of evidence that 3*73 was translated διακρίνομαι
before the time of Jesus, and that in available sources, Λ 3 never means
"doubt" but expresses, within its own linguistic environment, something
similar to διακρίνομαι in classical/Hellenistic Greek: separation and
division} 9
Bauer first establishes the special N T meaning of διακρίνομαι by cross-
referencing instances of its occurrence in the N T that, according to his analy­
sis, express "doubt". 20 He then provides three passages in the writings of the
biographer Cyril of Scythopolis as evidence that the meaning "doubt" for
διακρίνομαι is present in early Christian writings—independent of N T
texts. However, because Cyril is a 6th century author, 21 his writings cannot
be said to have influenced a shift in meaning that is posited to have taken
place centuries earlier. Above all, Bauer's attempt to show that Cyril intends
for διακρίνομαι to mean "doubt" is, at best, a matter of conjecture. In all
three proof-texts, the literary context supports one of the traditional mean­
ings of διακρίνομαι.
22
In Vita Euthymii 79, Cyril tells the story of a poor man whose ten sheep graze with the
flock of another villager named Kyriakos. When Kyriakos returns only eight sheep to the
poor man and denies the existence of the other two, village mediators suggest ending
the ensuing quarrel with an oath. The poor man requests that the oath be given at the
holy Euthymios' tomb. As they approach the tomb, the poor man suggests they both
return home because he realizes that Kyriakos intends to commit perjury (άναφανέντος
του μοναστερίου βλέπων εκείνον εκδίδοντα εαυτόν τήι έπιορκίαι διακριθείς λέγει
αύτώι· αγωμεν ύποστρέψωμεν, αδελφέ; 80.9-11). Nothing in this text supports a read­
ing that the poor man might have had doubts concerning his own actions. Rather, Cyril
writes that the poor man is fully convinced (έπλήροφορήθην, 80.11) he is to take his
official complaint only to a certain point. By expressing the poor man s choice to rescind
his request with the passive participle διακριθείς, Cyril writes that he came to the decision
to return home—although it was to his own legal disadvantage to do so. Moved by his
noble character—not doubt—the poor man changes the course of his own action. 23
Vita Euthymii 51:22-52:18 describes a similar situation. In this account, the arch­
bishop Anastasius informs Euthymios that he intends to visit him. Upon Euthymios'
reply that such a visit would cause him great distress, Anastasius comes to the decision
(ό αρχιεπίσκοπος διεκρίθη λέγων; 52.17) not to follow through with his intention to
24
visit him.
25
In Vita Sabae 173, Cyril records a dispute between Saba and some fathers (πατέρες)
about Theodora of Palestine's request for intercessory prayer. Saba avoids her specific
prayer request for heirs, instead assures her twice that God will preserve her kingdom έν
εύσεβείαι καί νίκηι, "in piety and victory" (174:4). After Saba leaves Theodora, the
fathers address him about his decision not to pray as Theodora requested (174:6-8: οί
μετ' αύτοΰ δντες πατέρες διεκρίνοντο προς αυτόν λέγοντες· τί δτι έλύπησας την
αύγυσταν μη κατά την αυτής εύξάμενος αϊτησιν;). Cyril uses the middle διεκρίνοντο
to describe the fathers' action, but there is no support in the narrative to translate the
26
verb as "doubt". Doubt does not motivate the fathers to voice their challenge; they do
not understand Saba's response and confront him, critiquing his action with a straight­
forward question. Bauer's reference to this particular text is especially surprising because
he lists, in the same lexicon entry, the structurally parallel phrase διεκρίνοντο προς
αυτόν οί εκ περιτομής in Acts 11:2 with instances in which he states διακρίνομαι
27
means "to contend with someone".
Presupposition 5: Post-biblical texts show that the meaning "doubt" was, at
some point, incorporated into the Greek language system. In addition to the
references to Cyril of Scythopolis in Bauers lexicon, some scholars see such
evidence, independent of the NT, in the second century works Proto-Gospel
of James (2nd century CE) and Homilies of Pseudo-Clement (2nd century
CE); 2 8 other scholars include the works of Heracleon (2nd century CE), John
Moschus (5/6th century CE), and Gelasius Cyzicenus (5th century CE). 2 9
However, a close look at these texts reveals that in each case the traditional
meaning of διακρίνομαι prevails over a special "Christian meaning".
Attempts to find an independent use of διακρίνομαι that means "doubt"
primarily reflect a tendency to attribute the special N T meaning to those
post-biblical texts that are structurally similar to N T passages.
One literary context within which Pseudo-Clement uses διακρίνομαι is a narrative
about a dispute (ζήτησις λόγων) between Peter and Simon Magus (Homiliae 1.15.3.1;
1.20.5.2). 30 Peter invites Clement who desires to listen to the dispute to accompany him
on his journey to the place of the debate. Wresding within himself over deep uncertain­
ties about mortality, righteousness, and creation, Clement implores Peter to answer his
questions. Peter gladly initiates Clement into the knowledge of "the things that are" (την
των δντων γνώσιν; 1.17.5.2) and, thereafter, expresses confidence that even if he were to
loose the debate to Simon Magus, he is not afraid that Clement would dispute the truth
into which he has been initiated (ου δέδια μήπως συ περί τής παραδοθείσης σοι
αληθείας διακριθής; 1.20.6.1-2) because Clement has become convinced that the truth
itself would never fail. Clement responds that he would never doubt (ου πώποτε
ένδοιάσω; 1.21.2.1-2; cf. 1.21.3.2) even if Peter himself should attempt to sway him
from the prophetic teaching he received (εί και αυτός σύ βουληθείης ποτέ τής
προφητικής υποθέσεως έκστήσαί με; 1.21.2.2-3). Happy that even he would not be
able to persuade Clement to accept another form of teaching (είς ετερόν σε μεταστήσαι
δόγμα; 1.22.1.4), Peter permits Clement to be present at his debate with Simon Magus.
Thus, Pseudo-Clement s narrative contrasts Clement with Simon Magus. Because Clem­
ent cannot be tricked'into giving up the truth he has received (μη δυναμένω άπατηθήναι
από του δοθέντος αληθούς; 1.21.8.2-9.1 ), he would never engage in a dispute with Peter
as Simon Magus does. The narrative shifts from Peter s assertion regarding Clement's
readiness for the dispute (ου δέδια μήπως σύ διακριθής) to Clement's self-assessment
(ου πώποτε ένδοιάσω) and, thus, progresses from the action διακρίνομαι to the action
ένδοιάζω. However, this progression is not a hermeneutical key for translating διακρίνομαι
as "doubt". Rather, this particular sequence of terms—διακρίνομαι (1.20.6.2), ένδοιάζω
(1.21.2.2), έξίστημι (1.21.2.3), απατάω (1.21.8.2), μεθίστημι (1.22.1.4)—reveals that
Pseudo-Clement distinguishes between doubting, swaying, and contesting. Clement's
answer indicates that doubt, the basis and precursor <?^διάκρισις, is not present within
himself. Consequendy, the goal of the text is to disclose the impossibility that Clement's
observation of the Peter/Simon Magus dispute might lead him to doubt (ένδοιάζω) in a
manner that would cause him to dispute the truth (διακρίνομαι) he receives from Peter.
In Horn 2.40.3.2-4, διακρίνομαι appears again in the context of a ζήτησις with Simon
Magus. Peter instructs Clement that an upcoming debate concerning the one and good
God must not cause him to be contentious (έπί τής ζητήσεως περί του μόνου και
άγαθοΰ... διακριθήναι ουκ οφείλεις). Rather, Clement is to observe and be astonished
(θαυμάσεις έπί τής ζητήσεως; 2.40.3.4) at godless persons' negative interpretation of
scriptural statements about God. Clement asserts that he himself interprets scripture
only with God in mind and clarifies that his questions arise from his desire to learn (άλλ'
iva μαθών; 2.41.2.3), not from any ambiguity toward Peter's present and future state­
ments (μή με ύπολάβης ώς αμφιβάλλοντα τοις υπό σου ρηθείσιν ή και ρηθησομένοις
πυνθάνεσθαι; 2.41.2.1-2.3). Once again, the narrative context suggests the author does
not view διακρίνομαι to express "doubt". Pseudo-Clement writes about Peter s concern
that Clement might become contentious (διακριθήναι ουκ οφείλεις), to which Clem-
ent responds with a clarification of the reason for his questions (πυνθάνομαι), i.e., in the
context of the dispute between Peter and Simon Magus, Clement reassures Peter that his
questions nourish his own learning; they do not foster dispute.
1
In Protevangeliumjacobi? the verb διακρίνομαι is embedded in a dialogue between
Mary and an angel who announces she has found grace before the ruler of all peoples and
will "conceive by his word" (συνλήμψη έκ λόγου αύτοΰ; 23.9). The author describes
Mary's reaction to this news with the phrase διεκρίθη έν εαυτή (23.10) and explicates
her reaction by putting a question in her mouth: "I will conceive from the living Lord
God, like every woman gives birth?" (έγώ συνλήμψομαι άπο κυρίου θεοΰ ζώντος ώς
πάσα γυνή γεννά; 23.11-13). Because Mary's response indicates she questions the angels
message concerning the event συλλαμβάνω (the phrase διεκρίθη έν εαυτή indicates
Mary questions the angel's message silendy, which adds drama to the narrative because the
angel responds to Mary's question as if she had spoken aloud) the angel further clarifies
the message (23.14-15). The narrative unfolds in a process of clarification: the angel's
speech (λέγων; 23.6); Mary's questioning (διεκρίθη; 23:10); the angel's second speech
(λέγων; 23.14); and, Mary's final acquiescence (είπε; 24.6). The verb διακρίνομαι
expresses Mary's skepticism about the content of the angel's message, i.e., there is no con­
textual evidence that the author intended διακρίνομαι to mean "doubt", or that the
phrase διεκρίθη έν εαυτή means "she doubted within herself".
Heracleon, John Moschus, and Gelasius use διακρίνομαι in a similar manner. Accord­
ing to Heracleon, whose work is cited by Origen, the Samaritan woman in John 4
"showed undiscriminating faith that corresponded to her nature by not disputing what
Jesus said to her" (ένδειξαμένην την άδιάκριτον καΐ κατάλληλον τή φύσει εαυτής
πίστιν, μη διακριθεισαν έφ' οις ελεγεν αυτή {Commentarti in evangelium Joannis
13.10.63.1-3). 32 In his commentary on John's gospel, Origen disagrees with Heracleon.
He attributes the woman's approval (συγκατάθεσις) of Jesus' words to her choice
(προαίρεσις) not to her superior nature. Unfortunately, this short quotation from
Heracleon's text in Origen's commentary does not provide enough context for one to
conclusively assess Heracleon's use of διακρίνομαι. However, Origen's judgment of
Heracleon's interpretation indicates that Origen himself does not read μη διακριθεισαν
as a reference to the Samaritan woman's doubt. 33 Συγκατάθεσις is the result of a dialogue
between the woman and Jesus, i.e., the woman did not dispute Jesus' words. 34
John Moschus describes a rift between Abba Julianos and Makarios, archbishop of
Jerusalem. Julianos had taken offense at Makarios (έσκανδαλίσθη ποτέ είς Μακάριον),
"ceased to be in communion with him" (διέκρινε τό κοινωνήσαι αύτφ), and, John
Moschus repeats, "refuse [d] to be in communion with Makarios" (κοινωνήσαι Μακαρίω
35
διακρίνομαι; Pratum spirituak 96). The literary context, especially the estrangement
between Julianos und Makarios, does not support a meaning "doubt" for διακρίνομαι.
Rather, Moschus' word choice reflects the development of this particular verb into a ter­
36
minus technicus for dissenters, i.e., parties who dispute or oppose doctrinal issues.
Διακρίνομαι is also used in this particular sense, i.e., disputing orthodox doctrine, in
Caesar Constantine's letter to bishop Alexander of Alexandria, recorded by an anony­
37
mous author who is traditionally identified as Gelasius of Cyzicus (5th century CE).
The letter does not contain any hint that διακρίνομαι in the phrase συνεισενέγκατε τα
τής φιλίας καλά προς τους τα τής πίστεως μη διακρινόμενους {Historia ecclesiastica
3:15:5) is used to express doubt.
In summary, as long as conclusive extra-biblical evidence for a διακρίνομαι
meaning shift is missing, there is no analytical basis to substantiate the claim
that this verb has a special meaning in the NT. Arguments based on léxica
and dictionary entries, inconclusive references to post-biblical texts, or a
"semantic shift'' theory that lacks extra-biblical evidence, more prove the spe­
cial meaning of διακρίνομαι ("doubt") has been set a posteriori than explain
the actual complexities of a genuine shift from classical/Hellenistic to N T
Greek meaning. They do not succeed in proving that a given N T passage
containing διακρίνομαι demands a new meaning to explain its content
satisfactorily.
A survey of Greek patristic and medieval authors who cite, or allude to, N T
passages with διακρίνομαι and also explicate these passages, reveals that
these authors show no awareness that διακρίνομαι is given a new meaning by
N T authors. Their interpretations can be divided into three categories. 38
Some early interpreters read διακρίνομαι as dispute/contest, others as dispute
or contest because of doubt or fear, i.e., a person who disputes/contests is
thought to be motivated by doubt or fear. Still other interpreters read
διακρίνομαι as being separated or divided.
John Chrysostom (4/5th century CE), Severianus of Gabala (4th century
CE), Theodore of Mopsuestia (4/5th century CE), Basil (4th century CE),
Cyril of Alexandria (4/5th century CE), and John of Damascus (7/8th cen­
tury CE) quote and explicate the use of διακρίνομαι in Acts 10:20, Rom. 4:20
and 14:23, and Jas. 1:6. Their interpretations agree that διακρίνομαι
describes a person who disputes, contests, or quarrels.
Acts 10:20
In his commentary on Acts 10 John Chrysostom writes that Peter was
uncertain about the meaning of the vision he had just received. To this
end, Chrysostom paraphrases the clause έν έαυτφ διηπόρει (Acts 10:17)
with θαμβουμένφ καθ' εαυτόν και διαποροΰντι, a he was amazed con­
cerning himself and quite at a loss" {In Acta apostolorum 173.30-31). 39
According to Chrysostom, Peters bewilderment prepares him for the
arrival of the men sent by Cornelius. These men put an end to Peter s
confusion (εύκαίρως την άπορίαν λύοντες; 173.32) by arriving exactly at
the time that Peter is told that he should follow them μηδέν διακρινόμενος
(173.35-41). In Chrysostom s exegesis, the particular expression μηδέν
διακρινόμενος, together with Peter s thrice-repeated protest against the
spirits command to eat unclean food, serves a primary purpose: defense
against possible accusations of lawlessness from both the Gentiles (to
whom he is being sent) and his own Jewish community in Jerusalem, i.e.,
Peter can truthfully say that he at first contested what he was told to do
40
(ΐν' εχη άπολογίαν προς τους έγκαλοΰντας, δτι καί άντείπεν; 173.3-5)
but, in the end, learned to object to nothing (ινα μάθωσιν, δτι καί
διεκρίθη, καί έπαιδεύθη μηδέν διακρίνεσθαι; 173.41-43). Chrysostom
distinguishes between Peter s confusion, for which Chrysostom uses
a
a
θαμβέω, be amazed", διαπορέω, at a loss*, and διενθυμέομαι, "ponder"
(173.30-31 ; 174.46), and Peter s protest, which he describes with the verbs
αντιλέγω, "speak against" (173.4-5,18), and διεκρίθη, "object" (173.42-43).
Chrysostom does not use διακρίνομαι to explain Peters perplexity or
doubt, but to lead the reader back to the narrative of his vision experience
and, therewith, to capture his repeated objection to the command to eat
unclean food (172.51-55). 41 Chrysostom interprets Lukes phrase μηδέν
διακρινόμενος to mean that Peter was not to object to anything. 42
Rom. 4:20
Commenting on Rom. 4:20, Severianus of Gabala notes that Abraham
found strength by giving glory to God {Fragmenta in epistulam ad Roma­
43
nos 218.4-7): Abraham did not occupy himself imagining how Gods
promise was to manifest itself (ου περιεργασάμενος πώς έγχωρεί τοΰτο
γενέσθαι). Instead, he immediately believes and praises God as though
God has already given what God promised (αλλ' ευθύς πιστεύσας καί
εύλογησας ως εύεργέτην τον θεόν, ως ήδη δεδωκότα δ έπηγγείλατο).
Severianus explains Pauls phrase ου διεκρίθη with the participial phrase
44
ου περιεργασάμενος, i.e., Abraham did not interfere with God's affairs.
I see no evidence that Severianus builds his interpretation of Rom. 4:20
upon a special N T meaning, "doubt". By affirming Abraham's non-
meddlesome attitude, Severianus appears to read διακρίνομαι "contest­
ing with God".
Rom. 14:23 Theodore of Mopsuestia sees in the participle διακρινόμενοβ
(Rom. 14:23) a reference to a person who is "at variance with the brother
and, therefore, eats with contention toward him" (ό προς του άδελφόν
διαφερόμενος δια τοΰτο καί μετά τής προς εκείνον έριδος έσθίων; Frag.
EpRom 168.2-3). 45 Theodore reads διακρινόμενος as "one who contests/
quarrels", i.e., Paul contrasts the contentious person with the person who is
motivated by faith to share a meal with others in an unprejudiced manner
(168.1).
Rom. 14:23 In Asceticon magnum (1036.28-1037.5), 46 Basil writes about persons
who do not accept the decrees of their superiors (περί τών μη κατα-
δεχομένων τα παρά του προεστώτος τυπούμενα). He cites Rom. 14:23
to support his assertion that these persons' futile and dangerous διακρίσις
causes slipperiness of δυσπειθεία, "disobedience/defiance" (1036.40),
and is a trap for others (1036.43; here Basil references Mt. 18:6). He cites
Prov. 22:10 and ICor. 5:13: persons who continue their disobedience and
become "the cause of quarreling in the community" who undermine "the
authority of the commands given", and who are "teachers of disobedience
and rebellion" (καί διακρίσεως αίτιοι τή άδελφότητι, καί την προς τας
έντολας πληροφορίαν διασαλεύοντες, καί δυσπειθείας και παρακοής
διδάσκαλοι; 1036.45-1037.1) are to be driven out of the community. 47
The content and literary structure of this passage, i.e., Basil quoting
Rom. 14:23 in this particular context and framing it with the term
διάκρισις (31.1036.36-38), indicate that he understands διακρινόμενος
in Rom. 14:23 as a "person who contests". Other quotes of Rom. 14:23
(and 4:20) in Regulae morales 49 and De fide 49 confirm my analysis that he
uses διακρίνομαι to mean contest/dispute.
Rom. 14:23 In the context of a discussion of the ϊδιον πίστεως {RM 31.868.34-40),
Basil draws a parallel between Pauls statement in Rom. 14:23 and his own
description of persons who use reason to violendy shake "the certainty of
truth of god-inspired words" (αδιάκριτος πληροφορία τής αληθείας
των θεοπνεύστων ρημάτων, ούδενί λογισμφ... διασαλευομένη). Α
faithful person, in contrast, does not dare to recant God's words or add
anything to them (καί μηδέν τολμαν άθετείν, ή έπιδιατάσσεσθαι; RM
31.868.34-40).
Rom. 4:20 In De fide, Basil first informs the reader of his method: whereas he incor­
porates non-biblical and, at times, unwritten sources in his refutations of
heretics, in his present work {Defide) he uses only what is written in scrip­
ture (cf. 677.23-41; 680.21-30). Thus, he says of himself, he approaches
this task "in the simplicity of a healthy faith" (έν άπλότητι τής ύγιαινούσης
πίστεως, 677.35-36) and defines πίστις—similar to his definition of ϊδιον
πίστεως in Regulae morales (see above)—as "undiscerning approval of
things heard in certainty of the truth of what is proclaimed by God's grace"
(συγκατάθεσις αδιάκριτος των άκουσθέντων έν πληροφορία τής
αληθείας των κηρυχθέντων θεοΰ χάριτι). Basil quotes Rom. 4:20 to
introduce Abraham as a witness to this faith: ου διεκρίθη τη απιστία {De
fide 677.45-680.3). He views απιστία as force that dissolves this "undis­
cerning approval", substitutes certainty with uncertainty, and questions
the truth. In the literary context of the quote, there is no discussion of
doubt, nor is there linguistic evidence that Basil understood διακρίνομαι
in such a way. He uses Abraham's faithfulness to amplify his approach to
the discussion of faith; because God's words are trustworthy, "to delete
anything that is written down or to interpolate anything not written
amounts to open defection from the faith and makes the offender liable to
a charge of contempt" (φανερά έκπτωσις πίστεως καί ύπερηφανίας
κατηγορία, ή άθετείν τι των γεγραμμένων, ή έπεισάγειν των μη
γεγραμμένων; 680.9-11). 50
Jas. 1:6-7
In his commentary on Lk. 18:1-8, Cyril of Alexandria writes that,
according to Pauls instruction in 1 Thess. 5:17, knowledgeable and
strong, faith-filled persons pray unceasingly and accomplish all things
successfully {Commentarii in Lucam 848.32-33). 51 To support this statement,
Cyril quotes Jas. 1:6-7: a person described as διακρινόμενος will receive
nothing from the Lord because "admittedly, the διακρινόμενος is an inso­
lent person" (υβριστής γαρ ομολογουμένως ό διακρινόμενος; 848.39-40).
Such a person does not believe that God will hear his or her petition;
as "accuser of the one who is powerful in all things" (κατήγορος...
του πάντα ισχύοντος), this person is "inconsiderately double-souled"
(διψυχήσας άβούλως; 848.42-849.1). Cyril's use of the words υβριστής
and κατήγορος does not point to a person who experiences intrapersonal
conflict, but to a person in direct opposition with God. His conclusion
that God does not agree with those who pray "curiously or carelessly,
rather, earnesdy and unceasingly" (τοις ου περιέργως ή άτημελώς, αλλ'
έν σπουδή και αδιαλείπτως ποιουμένοις τάς λιτας κατανεύσει ό θεός;
849.2-4) indicates he understands διακρινόμενος in Jas. 1:6 similar to
Severianus' interpretation of Rom. 4:20, i.e., a person who interferes with
someone else's affairs or a disputer who calls God into question. 52
John of Damascus paraphrases Jas. 1:6-7 in his discussion of the impor­
tance of faith {Orationes de imaginibus tres 3,41.40-52): 53 a person who
"approaches [God] with faith" (ό πίστει προσερχόμενος) will gain many
things, but one who is διακρινόμενος will attain nothing. The saints
please God through faith, according to John of Damascus, and Christians
are to adhere to the tradition "with a straight heart" (έν εύθύτητι καρδίας)
and "not with much discussion; for God made human beings upright, but
they seek after much discussion" (μη έν πολλοίς λογισμοίς· ό θεός γαρ
έποίησε τον άνθρωπον εύθή, αυτοί δέ έζήτησαν λογισμούς πολλούς). 54
This particular literary context also does not support the reading "doubt"
for διακρινόμενος, and I see no evidence that John of Damascus under­
stood James' assertion in this way. 55 He quotes Jas. 1:6 to support the
specific part of his discussion that focuses on a person who does not please
God through faith: ό διακρινόμενος is a person who approaches God
ready for an argument.
This summary of patristic texts supports my primary thesis. Neither Cyril of
Alexandrias description of ό διακρινόμενος as an "insolent person" and
"accuser", John of Damascus' view that ό διακρινόμενος approaches God
"with much discussion", Theodore s opinion that ό διακρινόμενος is "at vari­
ance with the brother", nor Severianus' understanding that the phrase ου
διεκρίθη means Abraham did not interfere with God s affairs, indicates that
these authors use synonyms for διακρίνομαι or explicate its presumed-
altered, special N T meaning. Rather, they highlight various characteristics of
ό διακρινόμενος and, to this end, use diverse terminology (rather than reus­
ing the word itself) to describe a person who disputes, contests, or quarreb.
Origen is at the beginning of the tradition that introduces doubt into the
interpretation of N T passages containing διακρίνομαι. However, before I
discuss his use of διακρίνομαι in the context of Pauls letter to the Romans,
I will briefly explicate two passages by Basil and one by Cyril of Scythopolis
because their use and interpretations of Rom. 4:20, 14:23, and Jas. 1:6 fall
between my first and second categories. Both discuss doubt and the action
expressed with διακρίνομαι, i.e., dispute or contest, within the same literary
context in which they cite Paul and James; however, they do not explicidy
relate the two words to each other as Origen and Chrysostom do.
Rom. 4:20
56
Basil writes in his work Regulae morales, "the sayings of the Lord must
not be contested and doubted-, rather, every saying of God must be fully
believed to be true and powerful, even if nature objects to it" (ού δει
διακρίνεσθαι καί διστάζειν έτι τοις ύπο του κυρίου λεγομένοις, άλλα
πεπληροφορήσθαι παν ρήμα θεού αληθές είναι καί δυνατόν, καν ή
φύσις μάχηται; 712.42-45). 56 Basil justifies this moral rule with a chain of
citations (712.48-713.36) that includes Peters doubt (Mt. 14:25-31:
όλιγόπιστε, εις τί έδίστασας); a quarrel among Jews (Jn. 6:52-53:
έμάχοντο ουν προς αλλήλους οι 'Ιουδαίοι λέγοντες); Zacharias' ques­
tioning of an angels message (Lk. 1:13.18-20: καί ειπεν Ζαχαρίας προς
τον αγγελον κατά τί γνώσομαι τούτο έγώ... άνθ' ών ούκ έπίστευσας
τοις λόγοις μού; and, Abrahams unconditional response to Gods call
(Rom. 4:19-22). These proof-texts address contest and doubt, and suggest
Basil did not view διακρίνομαι and διστάζω as synonyms. In other
words, I see no literary evidence within Basils presentation of this
particular rule that necessitates or supports the assumption that he was aware
διακρίνομαι has a special N T meaning and, consequendy, that he would
have read Pauls reference to Abrahams response to Gods call as
57
"doubt".
Rom. 14:23
Basil cites Rom. 14:23 in support of a similar rule, ού δει διακρίνεσθαι
έπι τοις ύπο τής γραφής συγκεχωρημένοις ("we should not quibble with
58
regard to what is permitted by the Scripture"; RM 31.780.46-781.7).
Nothing in this clause, or in his presentation of the rule, suggests that he
59
uses the verb διακρίνομαι to express "doubt".
Jas. 1:6-7
In Vita Euthymii 5.12-16, Cyril of Scythopolis describes a person who
stands firm in faith. Such a person carefully guards πίστις that is "undis­
puted/undoubted" (αδίστακτος) and does not "stumble with disbelief
(μη συγκαταπίπτων τήι άπιστίαι). To capture this contrast, Cyril coins
the phrase μη διστάζων ή διακρινόμενος ("not doubting nor disputing")
and quotes Jas. 1:6 to support his assertion. He continues with another
reference to undisputed faith (την άδίστακτον πίστιν) and the warning
"to distrust nothing of these things" (μηδενί τούτων άπιστειν; 5.18-21).
This structure, i.e., the surrounding of Jas. 1:6 with references to undis­
puted faith (πίστις αδίστακτος) and disbelief (απιστία, άπιστέω), and
the placement of "doubt" and "dispute" next to each other, supports my
view that Cyril reads διστάζων and διακρινόμενος as related processes,
not as synonyms. 60
In contrast to these passages in Basils and Cyril s writings, Origen and Chrys­
ostom see a relationship between the words doubt and dispute although nei­
ther author interprets one word (i.e., doubt or dispute) to have the same
meaning as the other: a person contests because of 'doubt. Further, Origens
writings demonstrate he is aware of the differences in meaning between the
active διακρίνω and the middle/passive διακρίνομαι. 61 His approach to
διακρίνομαι can be seen in the Greek manuscripts of two of his writings, his
62
commentaries on Jeremiah and Matthew.
LXX
In Jer. 15:10
(οϊμμοι έγώ, μήτερ, ως τίνα με ετεκες άνδρα
δικαζόμενον καί διακρινόμενον πάση τη γη, "woe is me, mother, that
you brought me into the world, a man accused and contested in the whole
land"), Origen sees a reference to Jesus (Injeremiam 14.7-8). He inter­
prets the phrase, δικαζόμενον καί διακρινόμενον, with two groups of
people in mind, unbelievers and ambiguous persons (14.8.14-17): unbe­
lievers (δσοι άπιστοΰσι) condemn Jesus (καταδικάζουσιν), and those
who are "ambiguous about him contest him" (άμφιβάλλουσι περί αύτοΰ,
διακρίνονται περί αύτοΰ). Origen concludes that Jesus suffers a dual
assault: υπό μέν των απίστων καταδικάζεται, υπό δέ των διψύχων
διακρίνεται ("from unbelievers he is condemned, by double-souled per­
63
sons he is contested"). Whereas his use of the verbs άπιστέω ("distrust"),
αμφιβάλλω ("being ambiguous"), and διακρίνομαι ("contest") indicates
that Origen sees these events to be related, it does not suggest he under­
stands διακρίνομαι to mean "doubt". Rather, this concurrence of verbs
demonstrates the interrelationship between the concepts doubt and con­
test-, for Origen contentiousness is a result, or symptom of, doubt, i.e., a
person s contentiousness is driven by doubt. 64
om. 14:23
In his commentary on Mt. 15:10-20, Origen quotes Rom. 14:23 to
explicate Matthews reference to clean and unclean food (ComMatt
11.12). Origen states that believers are defiled when they debate what is
inappropriate (διαλογιζόμεθα δέ τα μη δέοντα; 11.12.17), not when they
eat foods that Jewish law declares unclean (11.12.12-14). He considers
food used in idol sacrifices an inappropriate topic for believers' debate
and argues that those believers who know (γινώσκοντες) or suspect
(ύπονοοΰντες) that certain food is used in idol sacrifices (δαιμονίοις
κεχρήσθαί τίνα), and still quarrel about it (διακρινόμενοι περί τούτου),
act contrary to God s glory and not in Christ's name. For Origen "not only
the suspicion concerning foods used in idol sacrifices condemn the person
who eats, but also the quarrel concerning this matter" (ού μόνον τής περί
τοΰ είδωλόθυτα είναι ύπολήψεως κατακρινούσης τον έσθίοντα, άλλα
καί τής περί τούτου διακρίσεως; 11.12.48-54), a conclusion which he
65
supports with his Rom. 14:23 quote.
Origen's repeated contrast of a person's suspicion (ύπονοοΰντες;
ύπολήψεως) about idol-sacrificed food and a person's διάκρισις con­
cerning the matter, makes it unlikely that he understands the noun
διάκρισις, together with the participle διακρινόμενοι, to mean "doubt".
If one were to postulate that Origen contrasts suspicion and doubt in
this passage, i.e., "not only suspicion condemns the one who eats but
also doubf (11.12.52-54), one must also postulate that he introduces a
special "Christian" meaning for the noun διάκρισις, 66 and suggest that
Origen uses an argument, which logic he does not explain (i.e., Origen's
use of the construct ού μόνον... άλλα καί, "not only... but also", marks
a progressively augmented argument only if it is understood to be mov­
ing from suspicion to quarrel, not from suspicion to doubt). However, the
immediate literary context neither supports a "Christian" meaning for
διάκρισις nor an inflated progression of Origen's argument. With the
preamble that debating improper matters defiles believers and constitutes
the source of failure and sin (πηγή των αμαρτημάτων; 11.12.18), Origen
presents an argument within which he repeatedly uses the common phrase
διακρίνομαι περί τίνος (11.12.50, 54,59) 6 7 to express a believer's conten­
tion regarding a particular matter. In the context of his commentary on
Mt. 15:10-20, Origen states that believers quarrel about whether or not
meat is used in idol worship; he does not specify whether intrapersonal
68
contention is present. One can deduce, from these and other passages in
Origen's writings, that he recognizes the cause ofdiakrisis to be a person's
doubt or suspicion-, the inference that verb διακρίνομαι itself means
"doubt" or that Origen understood it as "doubt" however, has litde sup­
69
port within the literary context of his argument.
Similar to Origen in the context of quoting Rom. 14:23, John Chrysostom
introduces "doubt" in his homily on Rom. 4:20. For Chrysostom, Pauls
choice of the phrase ού διεκρίθη, not ουκ ήπίστησεν, signifies that Abraham
"neither doubted nor wavered" (ού διεκρίθη · τουτέστιν, ουδέ ένεδοίασεν,
ουδέ αμφέβαλε; In epistulam ad Romanos 461.29-32) 7° However, a careful
study of his discussion of Rom. 4:20 reveals that Chrysostom does not ren­
der the passive διεκρίθη as "doubt". Rather, he interprets the phrase ού
διεκρίθη to express the particular quality Abraham possesses that causes him
71
not to object to God's promise, i.e., Abraham was free from doubt.
Rom. 4:20
71)
For Chrysostom, Abrahams attitude of faith is in direct contrast to a
person who does not receive God s promises because of άνοια ("lack of
understanding"; 461.33-36). Consequendy, every believer needs the
strength to evade "reasoning of intemperance" (τους της ακολασίας
λογισμούς) and to expel "thoughts of disbelief" (τάς της απιστίας
εννοίας; 461.46-49). According to Chrysostom, Abraham did not grow
strong through reasoning, but through faith (τη πίστει ού λογισμοίς;
461.50-51), and sustained his strength by giving glory to God. 72 Glorify­
ing God is "not meddling with Gods affairs" (το μη περιεργάζεσθαι,
δοξάζειν εστί τον θεόν; 461.54-56). 73 Chrysostom further clarifies the
mezrimgofmeddling: "to enquire into what is below" (τα κάτω ζητοΰντες),
"to be inquisitive" (πολυπραγμονοΰντες), or "to insult" (υβρίζοντες;
461.56-59). Explicating the questions in Rom. 10:6-7, Chrysostom uses
this particular line of reasoning again by recalling what Paul writes about
Abraham (Rom. 4:20): faith opposes any reasoning (566.40-41); believers
need a strong soul that does not stumble over visible things (καί μη
προσπταιούσης τοις όρωμένοις; 566.58) and does not raise questions
(similar to those in Rom. 10:6-7, μηδέ έννοήσης άμφιβάλλειν και ειπείν
κατά σεαυτόν και πώς τοΰτο δυνατόν; 566.62-64), which are a sign
of "doubts in one s thoughts". Faith, however, is not concerned with
matters from below, but "seeks that which is above nature and drives out
the weakness of reasoning" (καί την κάτω πασαν άκολουθίαν άφέντας
το υπέρ φύσιν έπιζητείν, καί λογισμών άσθένειαν έκβάλλοντας;
566.65-567.1).
Rom. 4:20
In Ad eos qui scandalizati sunt 10.6.1-7.9, Chrysostom offers a similar
74
interpretation of Rom. 4:20. He repeats that Abraham gave glory to God
"by not meddling with Gods affairs and by not being inquisitive" (τφ μη
περιεργάσασθαι, μηδέ πολυπραγμονησαι), but rather "by yielding his
wisdom and power to that which is incomprehensible and by doubting
nothing concerning what was said" (άλλα τφ άκαταλήπτω της σοφίας
αύτοΰ καί της δυνάμεως παραχωρήσαι και μηδέν άμφιβάλλειν όλως
περί τών ειρημένων; 10.7.2-4). Thus, Chrysostom concludes, "glorifying
God is this: always yielding one s own thinking to what is incomprehen­
sible and to the inexpressible power and wisdom, and neither interfering
nor meddling with Gods affairs nor saying, why this? for what purpose
that? how can this be?" (τοΰτό έστι μάλιστα το δοξάζειν τον θεόν, το
άεί παραχωρειν αύτοΰ τφ άκαταλήπτω της προνοίας και τη άρρήτω
δυνάμει και σοφία και μη περιεργάζεσθαι, μηδέ πολυπραγμονείν, μηδέ
75
λέγειν δια τί τοΰτο; εις τί τοΰτο; πώς τοΰτο έσται; 10.7.5-9).
Rom. 4:20
Chrysostom also quotes and discusses Rom. 4:20 in De incom­
prensibili dei natura in a section addressed to "busybodies" (προς
τους περιεργαζομένους, 2.298) that is framed by the question of
Rom. 9:20, "who are you, human, who argues against God?" (2.300-
301, 327). 76 Once again, Chrysostom lists the characteristics of a
περιεργαζόμενος—insulting, interfering, searching, dishonoring (υβρίζω,
πολυπραγμονέω, διερευνάω, ατιμάζω; 2.307-312)—and portrays
Abraham as a gestalt in contrast to a person described as περιεργαζόμενος
(2.312-322). 77
There is no evidence that Chrysostom understands the verb διακρίνομαι
to have taken on the meaning "doubt". In his explanation of Rom. 4:20,
Abraham is not driven by reasoning that would have led him to ask useless
questions and, thus, question God or meddle inquisitively with Gods affairs.
Chrysostom s distinctive use of vocabulary to characterize a person described
78
as διακρινόμενος, i.e., πολυπραγμονέω and περιεργάζομαι, shows that he
interprets Pauls phrase ού διεκρίθη to mean that Paul thought Abraham
did not raise objections. In his homily on Romans 14 the same vocabulary
surfaces.
Rom. 14:23
78)
At the beginning of the homily, Chrysostom indicates he is aware that
many persons have difficulty with Romans 14 (οιδα, δτι πολλοίς απορον
το είρημένον; In epistulam ad Romanos 627.44). He explains that Paul
addresses a conflict between believing Jews who have not dared to let go of
the law completely and are, therefore, vegetarians (οΰπω θαρροΰντες
τέλεον άποστήναι τοΰ νόμου; 627.50-51), and other believers (the
τελειότεροι) who neither fast nor observe food laws. These non-observers
of food laws are a burden and an annoyance (φορτικοί καί επαχθείς)
for "the observers" whom they "reproach, accuse, and throw into faint­
heartedness" (όνειδίζοντες, εγκαλούντες, εις άθυμίαν έμβάλλοντες;
627.55-59). According to Chrysostom, Paul was concerned that the non-
observers' persistent intent to bring their weaker brothers and sisters to
show αδιαφορία ("indifference") toward foods might provoke them to
leave the faith altogether (627.59-63). Chrysostom also explains his meth­
odological approach to the interpretation of Romans 14: he interprets
Paul's statements addressed to τοις ίσχυροτέροις ("the stronger") to be an
attack on the weak (628.50-56; cf. 629.11-12; 632.30-32). Consequendy,
one sees that Chrysostom believes Paul's charge in Rom. 14:1 against τον
ίσχυρόν ("the strong"; 628.62), is actually meant to be understood as a
three-fold strike (πληγήv) concerning the weak in faith: 1) their weakness
is a sign of true illness that 2) is made worse by their need for acceptance,
which 3) the strong must extend to the weak without contesting their con­
victions (629.1-7). Chrysostom uses Paul's phrase μη εις διακρίσεις
λογισμών to call attention to the distinctive feature of a weak believer's
shortcoming(άμάpτημα):itprovokesthestrong/0¿%>«/^(διακpívεσθαι;
629.5-10). 79
Chrysostom portrays the actions of the strong—they rebuke (επιτιμάω;
628.60, 630.20), reproach, and despise (όνειδίζω; διαπτύω; 629.22),
place stumbling blocks (632.58-61), love quarreling (φιλονεικία;
630.21; 632.18; 638.16,41; 639.38), destroy fellow believers (καταλύω;
639.15-16), and meddle with God's affairs (πέρα τοΰ μέτρου περίε­
ργος; 630.10)—to be in direct relation to the (re)action of the weak. As
"judaizing" persons of litde faith (όλιγόπιστοι; 629.26,33), the weak are
"still shaken" (σαλεύομαι; 629.47) and offend (σκανδαλίζω) the strong
by observing food laws. Weak believers need to seek peace (ίνα είρηνεύη;
639.15-16) because their adherence to food laws separates and divides
the church, i.e., they are in danger of breaking away from grace to run
toward the law (καί μη σχίζε και μέριζε την έκκλησίαν, της χάριτος
άπορρηγνύμενος, και τφ νόμω προστρέχων; 632.45-47). Thus, when
Chrysostom discusses Rom. 14:16-17, he can say of both weak and strong
believers (Chrysostom does not identify which group he addresses) that
they fight and split the church (δταν γαρ μάχη, όταν φιλονεικης, δταν
λύπης, όταν σχίζης την έκκλησίαν; 638.33-34).
Chrysostom's discussion of Rom. 14:22-23 follows the same pattern
as his discussion of 14:1. Interpreting w. 22-23 together, he sees v. 22
to be addressed to the 28 weak (640.22-24) and v. 23 to be addressed
to the strong: "what good is it if one eats διακρινόμενος and condemns
oneself?" (τί γαρ όφελος, έαν φάγη διακρινόμενος, καί κατακρίνει
εαυτόν; 640.35-38). In his response to this question-form paraphrase
of v. 23, Chrysostom suggests that Paul genuinely accepts the believer
"who does not eat with ambiguity" (έγώ γαρ εκείνον αποδέχομαι τον
καί έσθίοντα και μη μετ' αμφιβολίας; 640.38-40). Eating "without
ambiguity" leads, in turn, to eating with a clear conscience (καθαρφ
συνειδότι φαγείν; 640.41). Chrysostom sees the social situation of the
Roman communities to be such that the strong, who do not succeed in
convincing the weak to eat meat, force them to do so and, thus, provoke
the weak to commit sin (640.45-49; cf. 639.31-33). 80 For Chrysostom,
a blessed person is one who has a clean conscience that does not lead to
self-condemnation. In contrast, if a διακρινόμενος does not believe that
food is clean "and touches it as if it were unclean", he or she commits sin
(ού γαρ έπίστευσεν, οτι καθαρόν έστιν, ά λ λ ' ως ακαθάρτου ηψατο;
640.44-45; cf. 50-51).
In summary, Chrysostom does not (re)define the meaning of διακρίνομαι.
Rather, he explains the attitude and actions of weak believers whom
Chrysostom—consistent with his interpretation of the rest of the chapter
which portrays the quarrelsome relationship between weak and strong
believers—describes as diakrinomenoi who eat "with ambiguity". Chrysos­
tom neither states that the weak "doubt"—eating while objecting (έαν φάγη
81
1
διακρινόμενος) is characteristic of ambiguity* —nor that the weak contest
the actions of the strong. In his view, and contrary to Abraham s example
cited in Rom. 4:20, the weak direct their objections toward God. Interpret­
ing a manuscript of Pauls letter to the Romans that places the passage 16:25-
27 at the end of chapter 14, Chrysostom classifies these verses as a prayer that
direcdy addresses the weak (643.40-42) who "were not yet firmly rooted;
rather, they stood but were shaken" (οτι οΰπω ήσαν βεβαιωθέντες, άλλ'
έστήκεσαν μέν, έσαλεύοντο δέ; 643.46-47; cf. 629.47). Chrysostom posits
the purpose of this prayer to be the weak believers' release from fear (644.28;
cf. 630.49; 632.25,51; 637.21,45; 638.40), which is the root of their failure
to recognize the present-working mystery of God. With vocabulary familiar
from his discussion of Abraham in Romans 4, Chrysostom captures the
diakrisis of the weak: by fearing the law, the weak scrutinize (εξετάζω) what
has been made known, meddle with the mystery of God (μυστήρια θεοΰ
περιεργαζόμενος), call God to account (καί εύθύνας άπαιτών), and are
inquisitive busybodies (πολυπραγμονειν; 644.31-34). Chrysostom summa­
rizes: "faith demands obedience, not curiosity; and when God commands,
one must obey, not interfere" (υπακοής γαρ ή πίστις δείται, ού πολυπ­
ραγμοσύνης· καί όταν θεός έπιτάττη, πείθεσθαι, ού περιεργάζεσθαι χρή;
644.37-39). Once again, no evidence supports the assumption that Chryso­
stom understood διακρίνομαι to have the special N T meaning "doubt". The
literary context of his discussion of Romans 14, and the use of vocabulary
familiar from his discussion of 4:20, indicate that Chrysostom, like Origen,
83
locates the meaning of διακρίνομαι within its traditional semantic setting.
Because the second-century work Shepherd ofHermas also influences the
perception that διακρίνομαι has a special meaning in the NT, it is fitting to
discuss this text briefly although, in an interesting twist to this verb s history
of reception, only the active διακρίνω (2.2.1; 27.6.2; 51.1.2)—and never the
middle διακρίνομαι or the noun διάκρισις—occurs in the text. Neverthe­
less, the author s frequent use of vocabulary (e.g., δίψυχος) and concepts that
parallel Jas. 1:6-8 captures scholars' attention, 85 especially the repeated
description (with diverse vocabulary and expressions) of doubt,* which
has long served as a matrix for the interpretation of structurally similar
phrases: μη διακριθη έν τη καρδία αύτοΰ (Mk. 11:23); ό διακρινόμενος
87
(Rom. 14:23; Jas. 1:6); and μηδέν διακρινόμενος (Acts 10:20; Jas. 1:6).
Of particular interest is the ninth mandate, which contains a paraphrase of Jas. l:6-8. 88
The author states that δίψυχοι are persons who talk to themselves (λέγων έν σεαυτφ)
and lead debates (διαλογίζομαι) in their hearts 89 about how they as sinners could pos­
sibly request anything from God and, in turn, receive (πώς δύναμαι αίτήσασθαι παρά
τοΰ κυρίου καί λαβείν, ήμαρτηκώς τοσαΰτα εις αυτόν; 39.1.2-3.2); none of their peti­
tions will be answered (39.5.1-2). In contrast, persons immersed in faith ask without
doubt (αίτοΰ παρ' αύτοΰ άδιστάκτως; 39.2.1-3; 39.4.4-5.1) and receive from God
(39.6.1-3).
Based on this analysis of Greek authors' use of διακρίνομαι, it is reasonable
to assume that the author of Shepherd modifies James' use of διακρίνομαι
with the verb διαλογίζομαι ("debate"; cf. 12.3.6-7; 22.43) if, indeed, he uses
Jas. 1:6-8 as a matrix for his writing. The assumption that the Shepherd's
author understands διακρίνομαι in Jas. 1:6 to have the special N T meaning
"doubt" and, consequently, substitutes the verbs διστάζω and/or διψυχέω
for διακρίνομαι, both lacks support from comparative literary evidence and
is not prerequisite to an adequate interpretation of Shepherd. 90 If there exists
no literary relationship between James' letter and Shepherd of Hermas,
then it is even less likely that the verbs διστάζω and διψυχέω are synonymous
with διακρίνομαι. More likely, the author of Shepherd develops a literary
parallel to James and also, with διαλογίζομαι ("debate") as an appropriate
lexical alternative to διακρίνομαι ("dispute"), shows that "debate" (albeit an
intrapersonal event in this text) and "doubt" are related—but different—
processes.
A few final texts from patristic and medieval authors that explicate Mt. 21:21,
Mk. 11:23, Rom. 14:23, Jas. 1:6, and Jude 22 mark additional traditions con­
cerning the meaning of διακρίνομαι. These authors span many centuries yet
read διακρίνομαι as separation. The texts suggest that the meaning attrib­
uted by some Greek authors to διακρίνομαι is somewhat in proportion to
their distance in time from the original composition of the N T passages.
Still, none interprets division/separation as an indicator of, or synonymous
to, doubt.
Jude 22
Within the immediate literary context of a quote from Jude 22, Clem­
ent of Alexandria (2/3th century CE) discusses a particular type of argu­
mentation, which invention he attributes to Protagoras: παντί λόγω
λόγον άντικεισθαι ("to oppose each argument with an argument'').
Clement argues that a true Gnostic is learned, σοφός έν διακρίσει λόγων
("wise in the distinction of words"), humble in his greatness, and obser­
vant of the instruction given in Jude 22. The literary context of Clement s
discussion about the best formulation of an argument, which he concludes
with the metaphor of a sickle that cuts and separates intertwined twigs,
suggests that he understands the διακρινόμενοι of Jude 22 either as per­
sons who contest or argue, or as persons "being separated" from the com­
munity (Stromata 6.8.65.1.2-4.3) . 91
ude 22
Jas. 1:6
Mk. 11:23
From a scholion on Jude's letter, 92 we learn that its author inter-
prêts Jude 22 in light of Jas. 1:6 (and vice versa), but not with the purpose
of discussing doubt. Although the author uses a manuscript of Jude that
93
reads, "ους μέν ελεείτε διακρινόμενοι", he still interprets the verse
to refer to "dissenters from the truth" (τους διακρινόμενους από τής
94
αληθείας εκ των λόγων τής ψευδούς διδασκαλίας). For this author,
διακρινόμενοι are (he quotes Jas. 1:6 in support) "pitied and wretched,
driven around by every wind of teaching" (ελεεινοί είσι καί άθλιοι,
παντί άνέμω τής διδασκαλίας περιφερόμενοι; Catena in epistulamjuda
168.30-169.3). There is no literary evidence that the author understood
διακρινόμενοι in both Jude and James other than in reference to dis­
senters or separatists driven about by the winds of teaching. The use of
the preposition in the phrase διακρίνομαι από also indicates the author
understands διακρίνομαι as "dissent".
Pseudo-Macarius (4th century CE) alludes to Mk. 11:23 (Homiliae
spirìtuales 15.110-119) 95 by using the parallel phrase μη διακριθής έν τη
καρδία σου. He writes that Christians (oí χριστιανοί) must not con­
sider prostitutes, sinners, and disorderly persons as worthless, nor should
they detest and question them, or "hold them in segregation/isolation"
(μηδένα έξουδενείν μήτε άνακρίνειν ή βδελύσσεσθαι ή εχειν αυτούς
έν διακρίσεί; 15.113-114). Pseudo-Macarius continues with an example:
μονόφθαλμον έαν ϊδης, μη διακριθης έν τη καρδία σου, α λ λ ' ως ύγιεί
αύτφ πρόσχες ("if you see a one-eyed person do not become segregated
in your heart [or, do not revolt in your heart] but turn towards this
person as if he were in good health"; 15.114-115). I see a link between
the phrases εχειν αυτούς έν διακρίσει and μη διακριθης έν τη καρδία
σου; the first phrase expresses the result of the action that the second
phrase captures. 96 For Pseudo-Macarius, διακρίνομαι έν καρδία is the
opposite attitude of συμπάσχω ("sympathize") and σπλαγχνίζομαι ("to
feel compassion"; 15.118-119). Διακρίνομαι έν καρδία causes the segrega­
tion of sinners because a Christian is, "in the heart, separated from" them.
Pseudo-Macarius does not refer to an intrapersonal split, i.e., a divided
heart, but to a religiously motivated social division that is rooted in an
attitude that comes from the heart.
In his explanation of the clause μη διακριθη in Mk. 11:23 ( Quaestiones
ad Thalassium 33:2-50), 97 Maximus Confessor (6/7th century CE) seems
to suggest the meaning "not being divided". Maximus defines πίστις as
ενωσις ("oneness") that the action of διακρίνομαι shatters. Explaining
the meaning of ό μη διακριθείς έν τη καρδία αυτού in two sequential
statements (one begins with τουτέστιν, the other with ήγουν), Maximus
writes that "one who is not divided in his heart" is a person "who does
not differentiate in the mind", i.e., a person who "does not cut apart
the oneness with God that exists because of faith" (ό μη διακριθείς έν
τη καρδία αυτού, τουτέστιν έν τω voi μη διακρίνας ήγουν διατεμών
την δια τής πίστεως προς τον θεόν γεγενημένην αμεσον ενωσιν;
33:32-35). Thus, Maximus reads διακρίνομαι with one of the mean­
ings of the middle voice, i.e. "being divided/separated", but discusses
the division with respect to an intrapersonal event that happens έν
τφ voi ("in the mind"). 98 Consequently, Maximus finds in the active
verbs διακρίνω ("separate") and διατέμνω ("cut through") words that
appropriately capture the divisive event. 99 Whereas Maximus retains the
classical/Hellenistic meaning of διακρίνομαι, he moves beyond classical/
Hellen-istic use of the middle voice with his interpretation; the middle
voice of διακρίνομαι is not used to describe an intrapersonal division in
that epoch. Thus, Maximus actually employs an interpretive model that
later scholars label a semantic shift.
Rom. 14:23 Photius' (9th century CE) interpretation of Rom. 14:23 is inconclusive.
According to Photius, Paul, in Romans 14, is discussing the topic έπί τοΰ
έν τοις βρώμασι διακρινομένου (FragEpRom 537.18), a phrase Photius
repeatedly uses (cf. 536.2; 538.8,13) but never explains. 100 In his exposition
of Romans 14, διακρινόμενοι are young in their faith (κατ' αρχάς τής
πίστεως; 536.12) and are careful about what they eat. Fellow believers
must not judge them because they expose themselves to God's judgment
(ύπο κρίμα εστί παρατηρούμενος τα βρώματα; 536.9). Whereas Photius
lists "αμφιβάλλει" as one meaning of διακρίνομαι in his Lexicon, 101 in
his discussion of Romans 14 he writes that διακρινόμενοι are weak and
unstable in faith (ασθενής και αστήρικτος έν τη πίστει; 537.19-20) but
does not state that they have doubt. With the phrase διακρίνομαι έν
Photius probably expresses something akin to "a person who is separated
or differentiated based on food". 102
Jude 22 Pseudo-Oecumenius (6/ 10th century CE) continues the tradition begun
by the scholion on Jude both by offering an interpretation that differs from
the manuscript's text (i.e., whereas the manuscript has διακρινόμενοι, the
scholion author interprets as if it reads διακρινόμενους) and by interpret­
ing διακρίνομαι as a reference to dissent. 103 He writes, «εαυτούς έν αγάπη
θεού τηρήσατε», τουτέστιν, εαυτούς διαφυλάττετε, τον άπο τού κυρίου
προσδεχόμενοι ελεον... Κακείνους δέ, εί μέν άποδιίστανται υμών
(τούτο γαρ σημαίνει το διακρίνεσθαι) ελέγχετε ("'[k]eep yourselves in
the love of God,' that is, guard yourselves carefully as you receive mercy
from the Lord... And refute those men, if they set themselves apart from
104
you [for this is what 'separating themselves' means]").
Theophylact (11th century CE) stands at the end of a long tradition of
Greek N T commentaries. He borrows freely and extensively from his prede­
cessors and, thus, aptly marks the conclusion of my survey of Greek litera­
ture. His particular method of borrowing from other writers merges the
different categories of meaning concerning διακρίνομαι. Theophylact inter­
prets διακρίνομαι to express an action that is related to, but different from,
doubt.
Theophylact retains Pseudo-Oecumenius' interpretation of Jude 22 (i.e.,
διακρίνομαι denotes dissent) 1 ^ and John Chrysostom's thoughts on Acts 10:20
(i.e., διακρίνομαι denotes raise objections)}^ With regard to Mk. 11:23, he
allegorically interprets the mountain, which believers must move in order
not to be separated from God (i.e., διακρίνομαι denotes being separated), as
arrogance (ύπερηφανία). 107 It is in his discussion of the parallel account in
Mt. 21:21 that Theophylact first mentions doubt (έαν μή διακριθώμεν,
τουτέστι, διστάσωμεν). 108 However, it is important to note that τουτέστι,
the link between the verbs διακρίνομαι and διστάζω, does not indicate the
words are synonymous. In fact, Theophylact explains that the term
διακριθήτε expresses the annihilation of a believer's oneness with God. Thus,
a believer's goal is "not to be separated and divided" (μή διακριθείς και
χωρισθείς), which is reminiscent of Maximus Confessor' interpretation
of Mk. 11:23.
With respect to Rom. 4:20, Theophylact contrasts Abraham with a
person who does not believe and glorify God but is "inquisitive" (πολυπ­
110
ραγμόνων; 397.50). Abraham did not dispute (διακρίνομαι), did not
111
doubt (ένδοιάζω), and was not ambiguous (άμφέβαλεν). Theophylact
views the διακρινόμενος of Rom. 14:23 as a person who is motivated by
doubt 1 1 2 and states that the phrase μή εις διακρίσεις διαλογισμών in
Rom. 14:1 is a warning against disputes concerning the weakness of fellow
believers (μή διακρινόμενοι έπί τη ασθένεια). 1 1 3
Finally, Theophylact s διακρινόμενος in Jas. 1:6-8 is a person who asks
arrogantly (ό μεθ' υπεροψίας αιτών; Expositio in Epistulam Sancii Jacobi
1137.23) 114 and, quoting from Cyril of Alexandria, is an insolent person
(υβριστής ομολογουμένως ό διακρινόμενος; 1137.23-24) who accuses God
(1137.26). Ultimately, for Theophylact, the διακρινόμενος in James* letter is
a person "who sets himself apart from matters that are certain". 115
With the analysis presented in this article, I attempt to show that patristic
and medieval writers vary considerably in their interpretations of N T verses
containing διακρίνομαι. Common to all, however, is that their texts show no
recognition of a semantic shift to a special N T meaning "doubt". Conse­
quently, what has become institutionalized and classified as a special meaning
cannot be shown to be the result of a semantic shift that was recognized by
the Greek authors themselves. It is more precise to state that the meaning
"doubt" became attributed to διακρίνομαι as a result of interpretation and
translation processes.
The saga of "doubt" begins with the interpretive creativity of Origen,
John Chrysostom, and others who introduce the concepts "doubt", "ambigu­
ity", or "lack of self-confidence" into their portrayal of the characteristics of a
person described as διακρινόμενος. The storyline continues with the author
ofShepherd ofHermas who provides later writers with a rereading of Jas. 1:6-8
that becomes normative for the interpretation of other N T passages with
διακρίνομαι. A dramatic turn in the plot occurs when Latin authors substi­
tute their interpretation for Greek word meaning, and create the meaning
"doubt" ex nihilo by using haesito for διακρίνομαι in Mt. 21:21, Mk. 11:23,
Rom. 4:20, and Jas. 1:6, and dubito in Acts 10:20.
This distinctive feature of the Latin translations of Greek manuscripts comes to light in
Origen's commentary on Pauls letter to the Romans. With the exception of a few Greek
fragments, Origens commentary is transmitted through the Latin translation and edito­
rial work of Rufin of Aquileja (4/5th century CE). Rufin translates Rom. 14:23, qui
autem discernit, si manducaverit, damnatus est, quia non ex fide (EpRom 10.1255.2-3). 116
Thus, he renders διακρινόμενος in the same manner as Jerome s Vulgate and virtually all
Latin authors, i.e., qui discernit ("who difFerentiates"), which is one meaning of the active
διακρίνω. 117 In translating Origens comments on Rom. 4:20, Rufin again follows the
example of Jerome who renders ού διεκρίθη with non haesitavit (4.982.16). An explica­
tion of this particular phrase is missing in Rufin s translation.
Without the original Greek text in hand, it is impossible to establish Origens own
word choices. Especially in light of the use of the middle διακρίνομαι in Origens
commentary on Matthew, it is appropriate to approach Rufin s Latin text in this matter
with caution. His translation shows that he understands Origen to interpret Paul (in
Rom. 14:23) as addressing the problem of eating ex dubitatione ("out of doubt"). It is
these doubts, i.e., whether food is clean or unclean, that cause a person to "make distinc­
tions" (quia qui hoc modo discernit, hoc est, qui dubitai, utrum vere mundum sit an
immundum quod sumit; 10.1255.29-31). Whether Rufin s rendering is faithful to the
Greek original or whether he is influenced by the Vulgate is insignificant to my thesis.
Whereas it is clear that a meaning shift occurs with Jerome s and Rufin s active rendering
of the Greek middle voice, i.e., Rufin reads διακρίνω, not διακρίνομαι, Rufin s use of
the phrase hoc est indicates that, for him, the verbs discerno and dubito express related—
but not identical—processes.
Martin Luther (1545), and the authors of the Geneva Bible (1587) and
the King James Bible (1611) provide yet another twist in the saga by trans­
lating the Vulgates rendering of διακρίνομαι, discerno, in Rom. 14:23 as
"doubt". 118 With Wesley (1755) eventually translating Jude 22 as "waver"
(the Vulgate has iudico), 119 and present-day scholars' affirmation of διακ­
ρίνομαι as N T terminus technicus for "doubt", the saga of "doubt" reaches its
contemporary climax. Thus, modern scholars and translators continue to
respond to patristic and medieval authors' nuanced approaches to Mt. 21:21,
Mk. 11:23, Acts 10:20, Rom. 4:20,14:23, Jas. 1:6, and Jude 22 by conflating
the traditional first-century meaning of διακρίνομαι with an ecclesiastic
interpretation in which the particular action, expressed with the verb
διακρίνομαι, is "doubt". This means that the major difference between early
and contemporary exegetical praxis is that early Greek writers first quote or
paraphrase the N T passage containing διακρίνομαι and, thereafter, interpret
"doubt" to stand behind the action of διακρίνομαι. Today, the verb itself is
translated, "doubt".
This sagas plot certainly includes a "semantic shift" from classical/Helle­
nistic Greek to NT/Christian meaning. However, the shift is not the result
of a natural semantic development but the product of interpretation and
translation processes that reflect different stages of a steady movement from
eastern anthropology with its concern for the person insofar as he or she is
embedded within a larger social unit and socio-cultural context, to western
preoccupation with the individual and the individuals intrapersonal well-
being. Doubt does not need "the other"; dispute does.
I conclude my analysis with the recommendation that the common Greek
language system be observed insofar as the rendering of διακρίνομαι in N T
passages (both inside and outside of the NT) is concerned. For a special N T
meaning of this verb to be valid, each literary context needs to reveal that its
author has expanded the middle voice s horizon of meaning. This can be
shown to have occurred with the help of negative proof, i.e., if none of the
traditional meanings of the middle voice sufficiently explains the clause con­
taining the middle, it is reasonable to posit a modification of meaning. Cross-
referencing N T passages does not prove a genuine semantic development. If
both the clause containing διακρίνομαι and the literary context within
which the clause is embedded support a traditional meaning of the verb, an
argument for a semantic shift is without merit; a rendering of the verb accord­
ing to classical/Hellenistic Greek conventions needs to be pursued. Future
research on this subject should show that διακρίνομαι s traditional, classi­
cal/Hellenistic range of meaning allows the reader to understand and inter­
pret N T verses that contain it.