Present studies in the field of textual criticism differ remarkably with
regard to their goals. While numerous publications study the evidence
with the explicit goal of identifying the original texts of authors, other
publications concentrate their attention upon the contexts of scribes
and their often meaningful secondary various readings. 1
In view of these lines of research, which both deserve full critical
appraisal, I wish to call attention to the rigorous standards of the tex-
tual criticism of Günther Zuntz and to its methodological results.
On January 7, 2000 die Neue Osnabrücker £dtung 9 the Osnabrück
newspaper, informed its readers that an unknown papyrus had become
known and was due for publication by the Österreichische National-
bibliothek, Vienna. This papyrus containing text from Hebrews 2:9-11
and 3:3-6, was assigned a date before A.D. 500 by the editor. 2 Eight
papyri with text from Hebrews are presently known: P 12 P 13 P 17 P 46
p79 p89 pi 14 pi 16
Those who have studied the text of Hebrews are aware that in verse
9 of chapter 2, we find an important variant reading, a reading classified
as original by Adolf von Harnack and many other exegetes, among
them, notably, Günther Zuntz, 3 but which has not been admitted into
any recent edition of the New Testament. As a consequence it is
accepted by commentators, but not by editors. I had occasion to see
the photographs of the papyrus on the Internet. The result is negative:
The papyrus is damaged in the passage in question and the text cannot
be restored. 4
Today the published materials on Hebrews, allow a considerable
advance beyond the texts available to Zuntz. We have the publica-
tions of the Institut fur Neutestamentliche Textforschung in Münster:
Β. Aland (ed.), Das Neue Testament auf Papyrus. Die paulinischen Briefe, vol.
II 2 (Berlin: de Gruyter 1994), the Nestle-Aland of 2001, and the
fourth edition of the Greek New Testament of 1993. The readings of
the Vetus Latina from the Vetus Latina Institut at Beuron are invalu­
able for anyone who works on Hebrews. I shall refer to all of these
materials.
The task of textual criticism defined
He who asks rather bluntly, what task, precisely, Günther Zuntz
had to tackle when writing his Disquisition upon the Corpus Paulinum, will
get an obvious answer: Zuntz had to define the textual character of
the Chester Beatty Papyrus II, and he did exactly this. Probing into
the text of the papyrus, one needs at the same time to pass judge-
ment on the achievements and skills of the scribe, of the corrector and
to identify anything amiss. Zuntz describes his task by the terms of
the classical philologist, namely recensio, examinatio, emendation By no
means is Zuntz willing to disown the tool of emendano', he accepts, for
instance, the splendid conjecture of Cobet with regard to Hebrews
6
11:4 ήδίονα.
The considerable burden of his task, in the face of an enormous
amount of accumulating evidence, becomes clear as the reader turns
to the first chapter of his book. Zuntz reports on the situation of the
textual criticism of the New Testament and on its agenda. Textual
criticism, according to him, finds itself in a threefold dilemma.
Observing that our witnesses join one-another in any imaginable
combination, 7 we are driven to concede contaminato as a disturbing ele­
ment of our findings. To clarify the pedigree of manuscripts by form­
ing stemmata codkum in Lachmann's manner, is therefore simply impossible.
Faced with this dilemma Zuntz proceeds with an analysis of Leitfehler?
Secondary readings, which by the distinctive form of their corruption
reveal a common archetype, are an indispensable instrument of the
textual critic.
Secondly, Zuntz sets out to correct a consequential misconception
of Griesbach. This textual critic used the term 'recension' as referring
to three ancient types of edited text (Alexandrian, Western, Byzantine).
Zuntz criticizes with care: "On this basis J. J. Griesbach, unsurpassed
in carefulness, caution, and comprehensive knowledge, elaborated the
classical system of three recensions." 9 Zuntz insists that a recension in
the proper sense of the word is neither discernible in Alexandria, nor
in the Western Text. The term 'Western Text' acccording to Zuntz
is to be used precisely. It is applicable only to readings with exclusively
Western support. Accordingly an alleged Western reading ceases to be
'Western', as soon as, for instance, a testimony of Clement is found
in its support. 10
Zuntz, following Kenyon, urges those who specialize in this field to
see the second century, this period of uncontrolled transmission, as an
age that predates all so-called recensions. He corrects, too, the erro-
neous judgements of Griesbach with relation to the Byzantine text:
this tradition does not depend on the West and, consequently, like the
other sources of transmission preserves, on a limited scale, ancient
readings of its own, readings that are genuine. 11
Thirdly, Zuntz obliges the textual critic to examinatio in the strict
sense of the term. Textual criticism must examine each phrase, word,
and letter. Here I must expose myself to the danger of clarifying
what is clear. Let me state: lists of witnesses never decide text critical
alternatives. 12
Zuntz is willing to inspect long lists of variants, say of Western read-
ings in order to single out the two readings which may claim an ori-
gin in the author's text and he finds σάρκινοι in 1 Cor. 3:3 supported
by D* c F G 13 and δόλοι in 1 Cor. 5:6 supported by D* and Ir lat
corrumpit. 14
Zuntz is not willing without further argument, to accept a reading
on the sole authority of P 46 . 15 He may accept a reading on the joint
testimony of P 46 and B, if interior evidence, say arguments from style
and context, recommend that reading. In 1 Cor. 3:2, for instance, P 46
and Β (and 0185) omit ετι and this, according to Zuntz, "so greatly
improves the style as to make the assumption of a mere scribal slip
16
difficult". The same witnesses are joined in "a palpable error" in
46
p
Hebr. 7:2 reading παντός (witnesses are Ρ Β sy ) and in the omission
of τέ in Hebr. 5:1, "which is against the style of the writer" (witnesses
46
1
17
are Ρ Β D Ψ).
46
He may accept a reading of P and Β in Hebr. 1:4, if it is sup­
18
ported by Clement of Rome and is recommended by the known
19
habits of the author: άγγελοι are mentioned without articles. So much,
at this point, for sub-singular agreements.
Which reading may claim a place in the speech of the author?
Which readings within the transmitted texts are ancient, and which,
possibly, even original? Textual criticism must by no means stop before
this barrier and fail to ask this question. "The critic must choose
between competing readings. If he refuses to do so, he renounces the
very purpose of all his labours
Textual criticism is not a branch
of science. Its criteria are necessarily different from those sought by
the scientist: they are not, for that reason, less exacting nor less definite.
The convergence of arguments drawn from the distribution of the evi-
dence, the dependence of one reading upon the other, the known
habits and typical faults of scribes, the characteristic proclivities of
interpolators, the development of the language, the stylistic peculiari-
ties of the writer, the context of the passage in question—these, and
still other factors combined can yield a certainty which is no whit infe-
rior to that of the conclusions drawn from a Euclidean axiom. Every
variant whose quality and origin has in this way been established must
serve as a stone in the mosaic picture of the history of the tradition,
for there is next to no other material from which it could be built up.
At the same time the evaluation of individual readings depends to
a large extent upon their place within this picture. This is another
instance of that circle which is typical of the critical process; it is a
fruitful and not a vicious circle. The critic may, indeed he must, aim
at a comprehensive picture of the whole tradition; he reaches this goal
by an untiring dedication to detail." 20
The style of this written study which I have quoted reveals a sur-
prising orality capable of establishing contact with the generation which
Zuntz wished to teach. My object here, however, is principally to
describe how Zuntz proceeded with the task at hand.
In his The Text of the Eputles, Zuntz presents an analysis of the trans-
mission of the Corpus Paulinum. Zuntz quotes from Colossians,
Ephesians, Philippians, Galatians, and from other Pauline letters, but
his methodical approach is explicit. Its goal is a complete analysis of
all units of variation in 1 Corinthians and in Hebrews. The language
of this latter author and the language of Paul are the standards of ref-
erence against which the work of scribe and corrector are measured.
Three sources of historical evidence, Byzantium, Alexandria, and the
West of the Empire, serve to reconstruct the language of Paul and the
language of the author of Hebrews. Since the scribe has to devote his
attention to two individual styles of writing, we must have ways of
checking him. Are there any differences in the way certain language
patterns are handled: if so, what befell those books in the course of
time? Habent sua fata libelli Zuntz, indeed, is able to discover influences
which left traces upon the book of Hebrews, influences from a period
when Hebrews was not part of the Corpus.
Is it possible to give a date for the Corpus Paulinum? Clement does
not quote the Corpus. He quotes Romans and 1 Corinthians, appar-
ently from an independent source. The Corpus, on the other hand, is
known to Ignatius and Polycarp. These authors quote ten Pauline
letters including Ephesians. The Corpus, then, is to be dated about
A.D. 100 and Zuntz adds to this conclusion: "2 Peter III. 15 appears
to refer to it." 21 Influences upon the text of Hebrews which predate
the Corpus are evidently as early as the last decades of the first cen-
tury. This sounds rather exciting. Are there such influences?
It was Harnack who observed that the Latin Vulgate is inclined to
translate the word απειθειν and its noun απείθεια by the synonymous
words corresponding to απιστειν and απιστία. In Hebrews this exchange
is found in Hebr. 3:18; 4:6; 4:11; 11:31. 22 This tendency to replace
απειθειν and απείθεια is a regular feature of this ancient version. The
Vulgate prefers increduli fiierunt, incredulitatem, etc. It is rather remark­
able that the papyrus P 46 similarly introduces τοις απιστησασιν, δι απισ-
τιαν, της απιστίας in four passages of Hebrews whereas this witness
does not do so in other parts of the Pauline Corpus. This phenome­
non recurs exclusively in the four passages which use απειθειν in this
Epistle. It calls for an explanation. 23
Zuntz presents this observation with a rather cautious question: "But
it remains a puzzle that P 46 should only in Hebrews (and not in the
many instances in Romans and Ephesians) have introduced the synonym
άπιστεΐν; that, in Hebrews, it should have done so in all the four
instances that could come into question; and that there should be other
Greek evidence for two of them—such as there is not in the many
other instances throughout the Pauline corpus. Perhaps this feature
24
goes back to the time when Hebrews was still circulating separately?"
Zuntz argued that this observation could not establish any rela­
46
tionship between P and the translator of the Vulgate. It could not
be interpreted to establish a relation between old Western traditions
and the text of this papyrus, since the older witnesses of the Western
text regularly use contumax, contumacia to match απειθης, απείθεια. Since
in the mean time the monks of the Beuron Institute edited their splen­
did edition of the Itala text of Hebrews, we can check this today.
Quotations of Hebrews by Lucifer, Ambrosius, and by an anonymous
expositor of Hebrews support this judgement. 25 While old witnesses
differing from the Vulgate have contumax, contumacia, the younger wit­
nesses show increduli, incredulitas, and infidelis.
Evidently, then, this change in theological emphasis owes its origin
to the East. Thus with due reserve, the assumption of Günther Zuntz
may be accepted. Hebrews suffered secondary alterations while not yet
transmitted as a portion of the Corpus Paulinum. At this point let me
add one caveat: Hebrews is no part of the earlier period of the Old
Latin tradition. 26
Zuntz, as mentioned, criticizes Griesbach for neglecting the testimony
of the Byzantine text. This tradition is valuable in spite of its many
secondary accretions, for its testimony is independent from the West.
Since this point is important for Zuntz, he is careful to demonstrate
the validity of his position. I consider this demonstration as vital to
the argument. This argument opposes the broad consensus of text crit-
ical common sense. It observes agreements of the papyrus with a minor-
ity of Byzantine witnesses and seeks to establish that the majority,
including most Egyptian uncials, transmits corruption in their texts.
Zuntz argues that the minority readings were not restored by conjec-
ture, but owe their correct text to a faithfully preserved tradition. 27
Günther Zuntz selects three passages to prove his point. First,
1 Cor. 3:10. While the majority gives χάριν του θεού, Ρ 46 0142 1611
1960 F (Latin) vulg 1 ^ 006 " 1 arm read την χάριν. The papyrus is accom­
panied by quotations from the Fathers, namely Clement, Theodoretus,
Cyril, Augustine. Zuntz notes une finesse de language of Paul. Since Paul
does not introduce Divine Grace as a general concept, but refers to
the Grace of God as a "χάρισμα with which that 'Grace of God'
endows an individual", την χάριν is appropriate as two parallel pas­
sages reveal: Rom. 12:3 Gal. 2:9. 28
Secondly a passage from Hebr. 11:37: om. επειρασθησαν Ρ 46 1241 s
syP sah Or pt Eus. 29 Before the papyrus was published, the shorter read­
ing was known from two minuscules only, namely 2 and 327. Again this
shorter reading finds support in the Fathers and in some ancient ver­
sions. Zuntz mentions the Peshitta, the Armenian, Sahidic, and Ethiopie
versions together with Origen, Eusebius, Acacius, Socrates, and
Theophylactus. Metzger's Textual Commentary adds 1984 Z 44 I 53 Ephraem,
Jerome, and Ps-Augustine. 30 Westcott and Hort had not mentioned
this reading. It was accepted, however, into the text of Nestle-Aland.
A third example for a weakly attested reading is to be found in
Hebr. 2:6. Τις is the text of the Papyrus, whereas the majority reads
τι. Zuntz calls attention to the fact that the author intends a slightly
altered proposition as compared with the text of the Septuagint. He
translates: 'Who is the man (άνθρωπος) whom thou mindest?' 'Truly
the Son of Man, for him thou visitest'. The scribes almost everywhere
succeed in restoring the Septuagint wording. The correct reading in
46
this passage is supported by the uncials P C* P, the minuscules 81
1
31
104 917 1288 1319 1834 1881 2127 2495, and also by d vulg* boh.
46
Zuntz adds a number of further passages. In these P is supported
by the majority of Byzantine manuscripts.
Hebr. 2:8. εν τω γαρ υποταξαι, while printed by Nestle-Aland, is a
corrupt word order, a solecism. The witnesses are H D 0243 Ψ 1739
[M] 1906. Zuntz argues that the correct reading (supported by the
style of the author) 32 did not enter the Byzantine tradition by conjec­
ture, but was present by tradition. The original text is supported by
P 46 A G Κ L Ρ 056 075 0142 0150 0151 0278 33 1881. It was printed
by Bengel and Griesbach. 33
Hebr. 11:4. μαρτυρουντος... αυτού του θεού is the correct wording
supported by P 13 * P 46 K 2 D 1 Ψ 0285 1739 1881 lat sy boh CI Or Chrys
Theodoretus and the Byzantine witnesses. The faulty τω θεω is com­
mon to 8* A D* 33 326 1311 1834* 1836 arm eth. 34
Hebr. 9:26 "The article before αμαρτίας is neither in P nor in the
46
2
Byzantine text will." Witnesses: P C D Ψ 0278 0285 1739 1881 pm.
Zuntz refers to the argument from the style of the author: Hebrews
35
speaks of αμαρτία without adding the article. Here again the Old
Uncials have a secondary article: « A I Ρ 33 81 104 365 630. Late
witnesses preserve a genuine feature.
Internal considerations favour the Byzantine text in Hebr. 11:13. A
standard phrase replaces a less standardized wording, κομισαμενοι τας
s
επαγγελίας Κ* Ι Ρ 33 81 326 365 436 1241 2400 is found in many
contexts, see 10:36; 11:39. The Papyrus is supported by the Byzantines,
36
46
2
but now also by D: λαβοντες. Witnesses are P D Κ Ψ 1739 1881
37
pm.
A superfluous article slightly alters the meaning of πολλοί in Hebr.
12:15. οι πολλοί is found in « A 048 0150 33 1908 "with c. 12 other
minn" 38 and also in Clement and Theodoretus, but πολλοί in this con­
text is to be preferred, 'many 5 , so P 46 D Η Ψ 1739 1881 pm. 39 Zuntz
refers the reader to similar passages in Mk. 6:2 and 9:26, where the
secondary article alters the text. In one of these Nestle-Aland prints
the correct decision, namely in Mk. 6:2.
The fact that in the last two instances D "joins the Byzantine bulk"
means, according to Zuntz, "more than the accession of just one, old
manuscript". "D may actually here be adding the whole weight of its
whole group to the evidence for the Byzantine variant." 40
One last passage serves to illustrate the value of the Byzantine tes-
timony. In Hebr. 9:19 Zuntz considers the list of witnesses as highly
remarkable. His conclusion: the words και τράγων or και των τράγων
are an ancient interpolation into the text. It is found in more than
one position, omitted by 30 Byzantine manuscripts from all sub-groups
of von Soden, omitted by the Peshitta, by the Harklean version, and
46
2
by Chrysostom; the interpolation is lacking in P and in Κ Κ L Ψ
11 31
41
0150 0151 0278 181 1241 1505 1739 1881 s/ ? Origen.
42
Zuntz comments on these lists of witnesses. He begins with pat­
terns in which the Papyrus is supported by an extremely small attes­
tation. Its correct readings find support in F and G, in a few minuscules,
in some Church Fathers, and also by great numbers of late manu­
scripts. I quote his conclusion: "The extant Old Uncials and their allies
cannot be relied upon to furnish us with a complete picture of the
textual material which the fourth and fifth centuries inherited from
earlier times and handed on to the Middle Ages. P 46 has given us
proof of that." 43
To recommend Western readings, even today, requires some courage.
Unsupported by pieces of evidence from non-Western sources these
readings often resemble a puzzle. Westcott and Hort in their 'Notes
on Select Readings' regularly connect the term with a definite connotation
of disapproval. Günther Zuntz, however, endeavoured to reinstate
Western readings to their proper function. In this endeavour he was
assisted by hundreds of variant readings found and published in P 46 .
It is obvious that a proper use of this material needs some prepa-
ration. On the one hand Zuntz had only limited access to Old Latin
witnesses. Work on the quotations from Latin Fathers has greatly
profited from the diligence of the editors at Beuron, in the Vetus Latina
Institut. Collations of Old Latin manuscripts are readily accessible now,
but they were not to the same extent when Zuntz did his work. He
needed to do his own collecting. Occasionally Zuntz speaks of the
"scanty attestation of most of these variants". 44 He did use the publi-
cations of Hedley F. D. Sparks and of Carl Th. Schaefer. 45
According to Zuntz there are three decisive witnesses in the West:
(1) the Greek archetype of D FG, (2) Tertullian, and (3) the arche-
type of d and the non-Vulgate quotations in Latin Fathers. The Vulgate
is a Western witness, belonging to (3) when it agrees with these men-
tioned. Hence Jerome or individual scribes retained Old Latin features.
His own work on 1 Corinthians taught Zuntz that every other sam-
ple of Alexandrian and Western agreement he had tested, led to some
type of Western + corruption. We need not rehearse his proceedings
in detail. A considerable number of passages analysed led, however,
to results which on internal grounds and in view of their attestation
could augment our grasp of Pauline style and argument.
This series of enquiries had an important methodical result which
needs careful assessment. Zuntz gained the conviction that none of the
purely Western readings shared by P 46 could be characterized as a
common error. Seeming common errors in each single case turn out
to be ancient survivals from two independent routes of transmission.
I quote: "The absence of any striking special error common to the
most outstanding Western manuscript and P 46 (or its allies) is a first,
definite hint that no direct relation exists between the 'Alexandrians'
and the Western text." 46 This conclusion is reinforced by an analysis
of two "purely Western" 47 readings from Hebrews which happen to
recur in P 46 .
In Hebr. 3:6 Zuntz defends ος as the logically correct reading. He
admits a possible argument against its reception, namely "that this con­
49
struction, so normal in Latin, is not easily paralleled in Greek."
Nevertheless, he is willing to attribute to this stylist the lectio magis
46
c
arbd
ardua. The witnesses are: D* P 0243 6 88 424 1739 i t
vg Lucifer
50
Theodore of Mopsuestia Ambrose. The reading of the Textus Receptus
13
1
v
h pal
is attested by P « Α Β C D Ι Κ Ρ Ψ 0278 33 1881 it syP
sah
boh arm Jerome. Because of its early and diversified attestation ου is
51
preferred by Metzger, but not by Braun.
In Hebr. 6:2 the genitive διδαχής is "grammatically inadmissible".
In the midst of numerous genitives it disturbs the construction. "Διδαχή
then must appear in the same case as θεμέλιον, the word to which it
52
46
475 53
refers epexegetically." Witnesses: Ρ Β 0150 it . The "inadmissible"
reading is attested by Κ A C D^ Ι Κ Ρ 33 81 614 1739 pm. On account
of its attestation Metzger decided differently, but not Braun. 54 The tex­
tual critic Bernhard Weiss listed two arguments in support of his
decision: a scribal mistake in view of the many genitives, is a plausi­
ble assumption, and exegesis casts its ballot for the better text, or,
as I would prefer to recast the argument: The context supports this
decision. 55
To his eyes the material accessible in Hebrews yielded comparably
little, if analysed in a similar way. Zuntz analysed ten readings in
Hebrews in which Eastern witnesses join their testimony with D. To
check the presented results we ought to compare the lists of Zuntz
with the fresh material from Beuron.
In Hebr. 12:27 the author interprets a prophetic utterance of Haggai
2:6. The words ετι άπαξ σείσω mean that heaven and earth after one
cosmic catastrophe shall enter the perfect age, in Greek: το δε ετι άπαξ
δήλοι των σαλευομενων μεταθεσιν. Nestle-Aland prints [την] των
56
σαλευομενων μεταθεσιν. Secondary articles are found in diverse forms
46
in several sets of witnesses, but they are lacking in D* P 1739 [M]
57
L 048 0243 323 arm. Zuntz refers his listeners to the style of the
scholia on the classical writers and reminds us "that such word-exe­
58
gesis is normally given without the article." We are also reminded
59
that articles applied to a new statement would be inept.
In Hebr. 5:11 Zuntz defends the anarthrous phrase πολύς λόγος on
the authority of D* P 46 * Ρ 1319 arm. "What the author wants to say
and what the text without the article properly expresses, is: On this
subject there is much to say, but it would be obscure.'" 60 Nestle-Aland
still prints the incorrect article. 61
In Hebr. 12:3 Zuntz discusses the alternatives of a participial form.
D *.c p46 pis 2 1739 1881 and Euthymius testify to a perfect participle
εκλελυμενοι. This would fall in line with verbal forms in the perfect
tense in verses 5 and 13. Zuntz suggests that εκλυόμενοι was intro­
duced by scribes to prepare the quotation of Proverbs 3:11 μη εκλυου
in v. 5. 62 This is the only passage in this list which Zuntz decides with
a measure of hesitation. He prints a question mark. It is remarkable,
I think, that this variant is not discussed by Metzger and that Nestle-
Aland rejects a reading against the testimony of D* c Ρ 46 P 13 and 1739.
In Hebr. 4:3 the author is again expounding the Psalm 95. Zuntz
remarks that the author freely refers to his text, for he omits the pronoun
63
αυτού found in 3:18; 4:1; 4:10. The Vaticanus Β adds his testimony
46
13
to the witness of D* Ρ Ρ ^ and supports anarthrous καταπαυσιν.
The secondary article is caused by assimilation within the context, as
64
Bernhard Weiss pointed out. The anarthrous form is correct, a decision
65
which should have been accepted by Nestle-Aland and Metzger.
In Hebr. 13:9 a faulty participle περιπατησαντες arose by adaptation
to the aorist of the main verb. The correct form περιπατουντες is found
46
in D* P K* A 1912 co. Zuntz refers to the present participle, ambukmlibus,
66
found in d ζ vulg. Nestle-Aland gives the correct decision here.
In Hebr. 9:11 it was Westcott who correctly identified the origin of
the disorder in the transmission of the text. The correct γενομένων
67
αγαθών in deference to 10:1 was altered into μελλόντων αγαθών. This
explanation is generally accepted by commentators, by Metzger, Braun,
Frede, Weiß. 68 Weiß argued that both participles in the phrases αρχι-
ερευς των γενομένων αγαθών and σκιάν . . . των μελλόντων αγαθών (10:1)
have their specific suitability. 69 Β is among the witnesses of the origi­
nal text: D* d Β Ρ 4 6 13 1611 1739 2005 syP 11 ? 31 Cyril-Jer Chrysostom
Oecumenius. 70 The edition of Frede quotes for bonorum factotum the Old
Latin manuscript 75. 71 The Greek New Testament cites the Georgian
version for the correct reading. 72 Metzger's Commentary refers to its,
"superior attestation on the score of age and text type". 73
In Hebr. 11:15 the context gives support to the present tense of the
lectio ardua, μνημονευουσιν. Present tenses are found in verses 14
and 16. Zuntz writes: "Here, as in ver. 22, μνημονευειν means 'refer
74
to'." The trouble arose, when scribes understood 'to remember'. The
46
75
correct reading is found in D* P 1739* Κ* Ψ and six minuscules,
76
also in Origen and Theodoretus. The Itala supports meminissent. Nestle-
77
Aland prints εμνημονευον.
In Hebr. 8:6 Zuntz argues on the base of the attestation of the lectio
rarior. Not τετυχηκεν but τετυχεν is his choice. Τετυχεν is read by D*
46
P K* 075 A Κ L and nine minuscules, according to Zuntz. He lists 436
78
462 623 910 1610 1611 1888 1898 1912. Nestle-Aland quotes three: 81
1242 2464, but knows permultos. The decision is correct in Nestle-Aland. 79
In Hebr. 12:3 Zuntz recognizes a case where the best of our ancient
witnesses testify to a corrupt text. "The singular <εις εαυτον> is the
only imaginable reading that fits the context, yet there is no ancient
evidence for it." 80 If nowhere else, Zuntz is here willing to accept the
B D
view that the acceptable reading εις εαυτόν Α Ρ 0150 ω vulg •*,
Chrysostom was introduced by conjecture. Witnesses for the corrupt
46
13
text are: D* P P » Ψ< 048 (?) 33 81 256 1288 1319 1739* 2127 ζ
A c d
81
vulg
pesh boh eth Ephraem.
The last reference in his list, Hebr. 13:21, shows variation as to the
length of the formula εις τους αιώνας, which in Κ A (C*) Κ Ρ 056
0150 0151 0243 0285 33 81 614 1739 [M] is given in the longer
form εις τους αιώνας των αιώνων. After inspecting two diverse types
of text transmission in several Pauline and non-Pauline texts Zuntz
decides that the shorter formula is to be preferred as the text of the
82
46
3
s
11
author. The witnesses are: P D C Ψ 6 104 365 1241 1505 sy sah
83
arm Theodoretus. I consider it remarkable that Zuntz hesitates to
give a similar decision for the short formula in 1:8. He writes: "One
would confidently describe the shorter reading as 'Western', if Tertullian,
Adv. Praxean 13 could be safely quoted for it; but I see no convincing
argument against the assumption that he translated Ps. xl. 7, and trans­
lated it freely (he has in aeoum only)." 84 Such critical care is to be
acclaimed. Quotations from the Fathers deserve care, indeed.
I am, however, inclined to call the full formula, as given by the Sep­
tuagint, a secondary restoration within the text of Hebrews. 85 I refer
here to the criterion of author's style, to the known tendency to restore
Septuagint texts, and to the attestation: Β 33 it Tert Irenaeus. 86 Yet
I agree that in this case the careful scholar may follow Zuntz. 87
Zuntz concentrates his attention with singular care upon single wit-
nesses. His analysis of numerous items of textual variation results in
recognition and disapproval, in recognition for faithful preservation of
ancient text and in disapproval for scribes who failed.
In detail Zuntz identifies processes of transmission in which valu-
able items of more ancient text forms were lost. This leads to the
notion of the 'lesser Alexandrians', as opposed to the central group of
46
proto-Alexandrian witnesses: Ρ Β 1739. Zuntz is aware of the faults
of each of these witnesses. He takes notice of the more hasty moments
46
of the professional work of the scribe of P , but Zuntz is also willing
to identify the correspondence of two independent witnesses in ten
cases of variation. Nine times D and the papyrus are absolutely right,
once they are joined in an ancient Leitfehler, εις εαυτούς.
Zuntz studied the technical details of Harklean manuscripts, in the
tradition of Pamphilus of Caesarea. Copies here transmit not only
texts, but also pass on formulae of time-honoured origin. Colophons
on younger and on more ancient manuscripts reveal Caesarean edit­
ing techniques, but the edited texts are part of a tradition that is con­
stantly in movement. Some Caesarean texts have, thus, little in common
in spite of their common origin.
The famous Codex von der Goltz, on the other hand, in numer­
ous cases, surpasses the text of the lesser Alexandrians. We ought to
understand that in an unknown number of passages its readings no
longer preserve the text of its archetype. On account of the meticu­
lous care of Zuntz, we now have some means of checking scribal per­
formance. Of the ten approved readings 1739 follows suit only in four
cases (12:27; 12:3; 9:11; 11:15). In these and not in all ten cases 1739
preserves the archetype. The codex does, however, preserve the reading
of the archetype in the case of the corrupt εαυτούς in Hebr. 12:13. 88
Let me close, finally, with some general remarks. What did we gain
from an inspection of the specific procedure of Zuntz?
Zuntz introduces his procedure by a careful investigation of the
methodical steps taken by his predecessors. He does not overlook the
ProposaL· of Bentley. 89 Where recognition is due, his praise is noble.
Where limitations have become visible in past work, he criticizes with
care. Such restraint honours the critic.
Zuntz writes a clear and vivid style. Time and again while reading
his work I have been surprised by the freshness of his approach and
by the multiplicity of aspects considered. His patient considerations on
single units of variation are strictly to the point. Some of them leave
the reader with an unforgettable impression. Let me mention the one
magisterial pleading for a sub-singular reading of P 46 and 1739, for
90
the reading ευπερισπαστον αμαρτιαν in Hebr. 12:1. Let me mention
his calm assent to a reading proven ancient, mainly by the testimony
91
of Church Fathers, namely χωρίς θεού in Hebr. 2:9. Gamerarius and
92
93
Bengel recommended this reading. Harnack argued on its behalf.
Zuntz supports χωρίς θεού by referring to the style of the author. One
uncial and two minuscules preserve the ancient reading: 0243 1739*
424c 94 Many good commentators did accept it, but only one editor:
Bernhard Weiss. 95 Circumspection and care are the marks of this
confidently handled method. Its eminence is shown by quotations in
countless notes.
I did not gather pearls. He who reads Zuntz, will find them. My
attention was centered upon methodology. Not least visible, are its
merits in the points which Zuntz does not display. The corrector of
P 46 found one mistake in ten. 96
Zuntz shows that witnesses from the scriptoria come to us as survivals,
these resemble streams. Zuntz shows that influences evade us, but that
in spite of this witnesses from three ancient regions are capable of tes­
tifying independently. Zuntz opened research on the achievements of
the editors, on the methods of ancient philologists, and on the traces
correctors left in their work. I hope that I succeeded in pointing out
that Zuntz left more than some handfuls of inspirations. He left his
questions and his method.