Chapter 10 of Paul's epistle to the Romans is full of exegetical prob­
lems. The τέλος νόμου of v. 4 has attracted a considerable debate for
centuries. 3 Although the verses subsequent to v. 4 are less notorious,
the passage has been the subject of serious scholarly discussions since
it is closely related to the interpretation of v. 4. The focus of discussion
concerns the precise relationship between the passages quoted from
Scripture: the one cited from Lev. 18:5 in v. 5 and the other cited
from Deut. 30:12-14 in w . 6-8. Although it is traditional to perceive
some sort of contrast between these quotations, there are some (e.g.
Karl Barth, C.E.B. Cranfield and Robert Badenas) who have resisted
such a conclusion. Their argument makes some sense, and is worthy
of attention. Since the two books of Scripture from which Paul quotes
are both part of the Pentateuch, it is inconceivable, so runs the argu­
ment, that he could place one passage from one book against the
other. In addition the latter passage as well as the former refers to
doing the commandment of the Torah, at least in the original con­
text of Deuteronomy, which Paul has omitted entirely. Paul makes
the passages refer to 'the righteousness from faith (ή . . . εκ πίστεως
δικαιοσύνη).' If the traditional understanding of the relationship between
the quoted passages is correct, we are then faced with the question
concerning the rationale for Paul's use of Scripture. We need some
justification for his prima facie arbitrary use of Scripture in his argument.
First we shall have a look at some of the explanations proposed in
the past. An exhaustive survey cannot be given here, nor is it necessary.
A glimpse at some studies will give us a sufficient perspective to work
on the subject.
Robert Badenas 4 denies any contrast between Lev. 18:5 in Rom.
10:5 and Deut. 30:12-14 in Rom. 10:6-8, and instead argues for their
complementary relationship. He understands the obedience described
in v. 5 as stemming from faith. His primary argument is based on his
teleologica! interpretation of τέλος νόμου in 10:4. Furthermore, he
argues that Paul would have been unconvincing had he attempted to
jeopardize the unity of Scripture by discarding a portion of it as incor­
rect. On the basis of his interpretation of the respective passages in
their original context in the Torah, he argues that Paul understands
them in a complementary relationship. He rightly points out that the
adversative meaning of δε should not be emphasized since it is basically
a connecting particle (cf. 10:10). However, despite his serious arguments
it seems difficult to evade entirely some sense of antithesis between the
two quoted passages. A contrast seems to be intended in the ways in
which the respective quotations are introduced: Μωϋσης γαρ γράφει
την δικαιοσόνην την εκ [του] νόμου οτι... and ή δε εκ πίστεως δικαιοσύνη
οΰτως λέγει. It seems natural to perceive some sort of contrast between
'the righteousness from the Torah 5 and 6 the righteousness from faith,' 5
and the verbs of writing and saying. It is appropriate to detect a con­
trast especially if we take the tension between orality and literacy seri­
ously, as will be argued below.
Karl Barth, C.E.B. Cranfield and others present another interpretation
in a somewhat similar vein. 6 They understand Lev. 18:5 cited in Rom.
10:5 as referring to Christ although there is little in the verse which
implies that reference. It is true that the immediately preceding verse
makes a direct reference to Christ, and that those directly following
present a christological interpretation of Deut. 30:12-13, but Christ is
not mentioned in the verse in question. As we have cursorily argued
with regard to the previous interpretation, if we accept that there is
a sense of antithesis between v. 5 and w . 6ff., it seems more natural
to take ο ποιήσας αυτά άνθρωπος as referring to humanity in general
than to the Man, i.e. Christ. Their argument is more theological than
exegetical. Again the tension between orality and literacy seems to
favor a contrast between Rom. 10:5 and 10:6-8.
A majority of scholars and commentators perceive some sort of con­
trast between Lev. 18:5 in 10:5 and Deut. 30:12-14 in 10:6-8 although
both quoted passages 'are clearly exhortations to keep or do the law' 7
in the original scriptural context. Joseph A. Fitzmyer not surprisingly
writes: 'Paul understands the Leviticus passage to be speaking of
"uprightness that comes from the law" and the Deuteronomy passage
as that which "comes from faith." He thus sets them in opposition.' 8
The former passage is understood as explaining 'the futile character
of the pursuit of an upright status before God on the basis of works.' 9
Although there are those who do not agree with this precise interpretation
of Rom. 10:5 because of a different understanding of contemporary
Judaism, 10 Fitzmyer's understanding seems to reflect the 'usual expla-
nation' 11 of the verse. For instance, J.D.G. Dunn is emphatic that the
righteousness from the Torah is 'an expression of how his fellow Jews
understood righteousness—life within the covenant, "covenantal nomism,"
the pattern of religion and life which marked out the righteous, the
people of the covenant,' and that 'there is no thought of "achieving
righteousness" here.' 12 Still, Dunn's basic understanding of Paul's argu-
ment is quite similar to that of Fitzmyer. 13
Although E. Käsemann can be classified in this category, his inter-
pretation is unique in that he draws our attention to the contrast
between γράφει in v. 5 and λέγει in v. 6, and then connects it with
the contrast between γράμμα and πνεύμα in Paul, most notably in
Rom. 2:27-29; 7:6 and 2 Cor. 3:6. 14 Although his approach, which
contrasts the righteousness from the Torah and the righteousness from
faith, is a possible way of understanding the present passage, it is fair
to say that he tries to press too much from the context. 15 He may be
justified in connecting γράφει with γράμμα, but there is nothing which
may point to πνεύμα in its immediate context.
The brief survey above has clarified the problem. In spite of the
resistance of some scholars, Paul seems to place a part of Scripture
(Lev. 18:5) antithetically against another (Deut. 30:12-14). Although
both quoted passages seem to make virtually the same point, he assigns
the one to 'the righteousness from the Torah' and the other to 'the
righteousness from faith.' The present contribution attempts to explain
Paul's logic and rationale for this apparent arbitrariness.
To begin, attention should be drawn to the peculiarity of the expres­
sion, Μωϋσης... γράφει in 10:5. 16 There is nothing unusual about the
expression itself, but Paul never uses it anywhere else in his letters. 17
When the verb γράφω is used in an introductory formula to a scriptural
quotation, it is almost always employed in the passive perfect tense
(γέγραπται), sometimes in the passive aorist tense (έγράφη). Out of 21
occurrences of the verb in Romans, 16 are found in the passive perfect
tense, which introduces a scriptural quotation. 18 Out of the rest of 5
uses, it is found twice in the passive aorist form, which refers to a part
of Scripture (4:23; 15:4). The verb is found only three times in an
active voice throughout Romans. Once Paul refers to his own writing
ministry, presumably through the hand of his amanuensis (15:15), and
his amanuensis, Tertius, refers to his own scribal activity (16:22). In
10:5, then, Paul introduces a portion of the Torah by the phrase,
'Moses writes.'
A similar result is obtained if we turn to the other parts of the New
Testament. There are 18 occurrences of the verb, γράφω, in 1 Corin­
thians. 9 out of 18 are found in the passive perfect tense, all of which
introduce a scriptural quotation. 19 The other three passive forms include
one perfect participle directly modifying the noun 20 and two aorist
indicatives. 21 5 out of the 6 active forms are in the first person sin­
gular, referring to Paul's own writing ministry. 22 The last one is found
in the second person plural form, which refers to the Corinthians's
writing activity. 23
Things look slightly different if we turn to 2 Corinthians, but the
result is more or less the same as far as our interests are concerned.
There are 10 uses of the verb in 2 Corinthians. Out of 10 occurrences
3 are found in the passive perfect tense. 24 6 out of the 7 active forms
are employed in the first person, referring to Paul's own writing min­
istry. 25 The last one is in the infinitive form, but used with the first
person singular pronoun, which signifies something like Tor me to write
to you.' 26 Again the reference is to Paul's own writing ministry.
We find 7 occurrences of γράφω in the epistle to the Galatians.
Twice the verb refers to Paul's own writing ministry. 27 The remaining
uses are found in the passive perfect tense. 28 There are only 7 uses of
the verb in the rest of the Pauline corpus, all of which refer to Paul's
own writing ministry although the form varies from case to case. 29
If we return to Romans, a comparison with the other verbs like
λέγω will help us to appreciate the significance of the expression in
10:5. Apart from the regular use of the passive perfect form of
γράφω, Paul makes use of a form of the verb, λέγω, when he intro­
duces a scriptural quotation in, for example, 10:6, 8. In 10:19 it is the
phrase, Μωϋσής λέγει, which introduces a citation from Deut. 32. More
telling is the combination of ή γραφή with λέγει in, for example, 9:17;
10:11, which can be translated literally as 'the writing, i.e., Scripture,
says.' If we count the occurrences of the verb λέγω used to introduce
a scriptural quotation, we can find up to twenty-one of them in
31
Romans. 17 out of 21 are used in the present tense. Out of the 21
occurrences 14 are found in chapters 9-11.
A cursory survey of other materials confirms our findings so far.
Both in the Mishnah and the Dead Sea Scrolls the verbs of writing
pro) and saying ("IQK) are employed to introduce an explicit scriptural
quotation. The verb, 3ΓΟ, is almost always used in the passive form
in an introductory formula for explicit quotations of Scripture, but not
32
in an active form. With regard to Josephus and Philo it is extremely
difficult to conclude anything definite about formulas to introduce a
scriptural quotation since their works include retelling of scriptural nar­
rative, in which scriptural 'quotations' are usually interwoven within
their accounts.
Since I have emphasized the significance of the phrase, Μωϋσης...
γράφει, 33 it might seem as though I were calling for a resurrection of
Käsemann's thesis regarding the γράμμα and πνεύμα dichotomy. On
the contrary, I should like to take a markedly different approach to
the question. I propose that there is a tension between orality and
literacy/textuality standing behind these references to Scripture in Rom.
10. In contrast to the introduction to a scriptural quotation, Μωϋσης...
γράφει, Paul emphasizes the oral nature and oral communication of
the gospel consistently in 10:6-21.
Before we approach Rom. 10 from the perspective of orality and
literacy, it is necessary to have a close look at Paul's use of γέγραπται.
Although Paul makes use of the verb γράφω in an active voice only
once when he introduces a scriptural quotation, the passive perfect
34
form (γέγραπται) is frequently found throughout his writings (e.g. Rom.
8:36; 9:13, 33; 10:15; 11:8). This is apparently a literary phenomenon,
but can be classified in a special category, which illustrates a tension
between orality and literacy. As a background survey we look first at
γέγραπται in LXX, and then in the New Testament.
In the whole LXX γέγραπται occurs twenty-five times. 35 In all the
passages it is used to describe the fact that something is recorded in
some authoritative documents. Josh. 9:2β; 2 Kings 14:6; 23:21; 2 Chr.
23:18; 35:12; Neh. 10:35, 37; Tob. 1:6 are obvious cases since the
Law of Moses is explicitly mentioned. 2 Chr. 32:32 refers to the
prophecy of Isaiah. Although most of the other passages tend to employ
obscure expressions, they also refer to some authoritative documents,
either those pre-scriptural documents apparently used as 'sources'
for some part of Scripture 36 or official state documents 37 including
Jezebel's sealed letter in the name of Ahab concerning Naboth (1 Kings
20:11).
At first sight it appears difficult to make sense of Job 42:17a, a part
of the epilogue to Job in LXX, which reads: γέγραπται δε αυτόν πάλιν
άναστήσεσθαι μεθ' ων ό κύριος άνίστησιν. The subsequent verse 17β
claims that the whole account of Job is translated εκ της Συριακής
βίβλου. We can conclude that the γέγραπται in Job 42:17a also refers
to the writing down in Scripture. The case of Psa. 40 (39 in LXX):
8 is slightly different and difficult, since it is not certain what scroll is
referred to in the context. But it is arguable that the psalmist has in
mind a scroll of Scripture since he is speaking to his God. In Isa. 65:6
God himself is described as saying, 'ιδού γέγραπται ενώπιον μου (behold,
it is written before me),' which is comparable to saying that s it is
written in Scripture. 5 lEsdr. 3:9 and Ezra 5:7 seem to be exceptional.
Some simple notes are referred to by γέγραπται in these verses, but
with some official nature. Still the fact remains that most of the instances
of γέγραπται in LXX refer to the fact that something is written in
some sort of Scripture or official authoritative documents.
A similar picture emerges when we turn to the New Testament.
Almost all the uses of γέγραπται in the New Testament introduce a
scriptural citation. Out of 67 occurrences of γέγραπται in the New
Testament 55 introduce a scriptural citation. 38 In addition there are other
passages, which refer to a certain content or a summary of Scripture
without quoting from Scripture as such: e.g. Matt 26:24a reads: ό μεν
υιός του ανθρώπου υπάγει καθώς γέγραπται περί αύτοΰ. We can count
7 uses in this category. 39 An instance in Heb. 10:7 occurs with a citation
from Ps. 40 (39 in LXX):8, which the author of Hebrews understands
as a messianic prophecy. For him the Old Testament passage must
be a scriptural prophecy concerning Christ. Two occurrences in Re­
velation concern the fact that someone's name is not recorded in the
book of life (Rev. 13:8; 17:8). In John 20:31 John refers to his own writ­
ing in connection with his writing purpose: ταΰτα δε γέγραπται ίνα . . , 40
The last instance, 1 Cor. 4:6, concerns one of the most technically
interesting and notorious clauses for textual and exegetical discussion
namely το μη υπέρ α γέγραπται. Anthony C. Thiselton enumerates
seven possible interpretations, 41 and proposes to combine the thrust of
what Paul has quoted from Scripture with two broader principles: the
regular appeal to the Old Testament as Christian scripture and the
idea that this passage has assumed the status of a maxim, or a say­
42
ing well known in the Corinthian church.
If we widen our research slightly, the result turns out to be quite
similar. In Philo's writings the γέγραπται occurs eleven times, and all
of them refer to Scripture and introduce either a scriptural citation or
43
its summary. In Josephus there are 7 occurrences of γέγραπται. Only
one of them refers to Scripture as such, but the rest make reference
to some sort of official documents. 44 However, it must be admitted
that this tendency is not recognizable once we widen the scope of our
research beyond Hellenistic Jewish literature. 45
Although it is not appropriate as a grammatical term, almost all
occurrences of γέγραπται seem to be so-called 'divine passives,' that is,
'God wrote/has written.' The power of writing is recognizable in the
usage of γέγραπται. However, it is extremely difficult to distinguish
whether the power derives from the writing in general or from the
divine writing. Probably it is the case that the power is perceived in
the writing in general, but especially in the authoritative writing. 46
Now we turn to a general survey of orality and literacy as the back­
ground information, which might shed some light on our passage.
Milman Parry has 'rediscovered' and argued convincingly for the oral
nature of the Homeric verses. 47 It is now almost unanimously accepted
that the Homeric verses were originally composed extemporaneously
and sung without the aid of writing. This Homeric state of mind can
be contrasted with that of Plato (c. 429-347 BCE), which was enabled
by literacy. 48 From another point of view it is Isocrates (436-338 BCE)
who established the literary mind; he was the first logographer although
he has probably never delivered an address orally. 49 A dynamic tension
between orality and literacy predominated in ancient Greece, for instance
in Plato and Isocrates. 50 In more general terms Walter Ong has argued
that there were two different modes of thinking and expression, i.e.
oral and literate cultures. 51 These studies may provide us with some
background information to the New Testament, but only indirecdy since
literacy was widespread and rooted in contemporary society by New
Testament times. By the time of Aristotle (384-322 BCE) not only books
were abundant, but also a reading public had emerged. This was the period
of libraries and readers, as is evidenced by Aristotle's personal library. 52
Since we are not dealing with an illiterate society when we look at
the New Testament world, we cannot take it for granted that there
was a simple opposition between orality and literacy. 53 However, even
after literacy has become common, oral mentality and preference for
orality have persisted. 54 Probably we should think in terms of a nuanced
tension between orality and literacy, not a simple opposition since we
are dealing with an ancient literate society where orality persisted.
From this perspective it is worth noting that there were certain am­
bivalent attitudes towards literacy in the ancient world. 55 The proverbial
phrase, ζώση φωνή ('living voice 3 ), is attested for the first time in Cicero,
Utters to Atticus II 12.2 (59 BCE): ubi sunt qui aiunt ζώσης φωνής?
56
('What nonsense that is about the living voice!') Among Lucius Annaeus
Seneca's epistles addressed to Lucilius (63-65 CE) the phrase occurs
twice in Latin: Plus tarnen tibi et viva vox et convictus quam oratio
proderit. (vi. 5; O f course, however, the living voice and the intimacy
57
of a common life will help you more than the written word.') 'Multum,'
inquit, 'viva vox facit.' (xxxiii. 9; 'The living voice,' one replies, 'is a
great help.') 58 Although it is extremely difficult to specify the extent of
circulation the phrase enjoyed, the precise context of its use and its
origin, its use demonstrates the existence of scepticism towards the written
word in the ancient world. It is easier to find evidence for the sceptical
sentiment towards the written word in the Christian literature of the
later centuries. 59 The relevant passages in the Pauline corpus will be
surveyed briefly with special reference to orality and literacy. This sur­
vey will deal only with the oral nature of letters and the Pauline epistles.
A letter functions as a substitute for someone's personal presence 60
and oral personal communication. It follows that real letters (literary
letters excluded) as a literary genre had some sort of oral nature.
People usually dictated letters to scribes and they were read aloud in
usual circumstances, and sometimes with additional explanations, if
62
necessary. For instance, if we look at Paul's letters closely, it is not
difficult to find some oral traits like diatribal arguments and oral pat­
63
terning. While there are several ways to explain the phenomenon of
oral traits in a written medium like letters, 64 we may safely conclude
that real letters as a literary genre can be situated somewhere between
orality and literacy.
A good example of a tension between orality and literacy is the
combination of ή γραφή with the verb λέγω (e.g. Rom. 9:17; 10: II). 65
Since this phenomenon can be easily explained as a personification of
ή γραφή, a tension may be too strong a word to describe it. It may
be better to characterize it as fluidity. The idea that any text is to be
read aloud and heard is reflected in this fluidity. Jews heard Scripture
read aloud at the synagogal worship. 66 Since reading silently only with
the eyes was rare, all reading was reading aloud. It may be the case
that people did not consciously distinguish the written medium from
the oral medium. 67 Or to put it more precisely, it was taken for granted
that the written medium was subsidiary to the oral medium.
A similar but somewhat more sophisticated personification is found
in Gal. 3:8, which reads: προϊδοΰσα . . . ή γραφή οτι..., προευηγγελίσατο
τφ Αβραάμ.. , 68 (Scripture, knowing beforehand that..., evangelized
beforehand to Abraham...) The verb προευαγγελίζομαι / εύ<χγγελίζω
does not necessarily imply oral communication, but that is basically
what Paul had in mind, as will be seen below. Apparently in the con­
text of Genesis God's promise of blessing was spoken to Abraham. 69
Another indication of Paul's initial reservations about writing can
be detected in his repeated references to his previous oral instruction
in 1 Thess. 4:1-5:1. He may merely be referring back to his previous
instruction given during his recent visit, but he seems to prefer face-
to-face oral instruction to a written medium. The introduction to the
paraenetic section of the letter seems to disguise a mild apology for
writing (4:1-2):
λοιπόν ουν, αδελφοί, έρωτώμεν ΰμ&ς καΐ παρακαλοΰμεν έν κυρίφ Ίησοΰ, ίνα
καθώς παρελάβετε παρ' ημών (as you learned from us [orally]) το πώς δει ύμας
περιπατείν και άρέσκειν θεψ, καθώς και περιπατείτε, ίνα περισσεύητε μάλλον,
οϊδατε γαρ τίνας παραγγελίας έδώκαμεν ύμΐν (what instructions we gave you
[orally]) δια του κυρίου Ίησοΰ.
The references to Paul's previous oral instruction are interspersed
in the rest of the chapter: καθώς και προείπαμεν ύμΐν καΐ διεμαρ-
τυράμεθα (4:6b); περί δε της φιλαδελφίας ου χρείαν έχετε γράφειν ύμΐν
(4:9); παρακαλοΰμεν δε ύμας, αδελφοί,... καθώς ύμΐν παρηγ/είλαμεν
(4:10b, Hb); περί δε των χρόνων καΐ των καιρών, αδελφοί, ου χρείαν
έχετε ύμΐν γράφεσθαι (5:1) The phrase *ού χρείαν έχετε' is a rhetorical
device, but its repeated use implies that Paul is almost saying that it
is unnecessary to write to his addressees since oral instruction had
already been given.
By alluding repeatedly to his previous oral instruction Paul bases
his written word on the spoken. 70 Paul's remark in Gal. 4:20 is relevant
here. He would have preferred to be with his churches and communicate
with them face-to-face.
Arthur Dewey presents an excellent interpretation of Gal. 3:1-14 in
terms of orality and literacy although the expressions he explicitly uses
71
are πνεύμα and γράμμα. He points out that Gal. 3:8 reveals a tension
between orality and literacy, where Paul takes the scriptural blessing
to Abraham as the prophecy of the oral gospel (see above). When Paul
starts arguing about the curse of the Torah, he emphasizes the written
nature of the Torah, which is evident if we compare Deut. 27:26
(LXX) and its citation in Gal. 3:10. 72
In Romans 10, especially starting from v. 6 onwards, Paul definitely
stresses the orality of the gospel. Verse 6 introduces the theme of the
oral gospel by stating ή δε εκ πίστεως δικαιοσύνη οΰτως λέγει· μη εΐπης
έν τη καρδία σ ο υ · . . . (But the righteousness from faith says thus, 'Do
not say in your heart...') In connection with the citation from Deut.
30:14 Paul explains it as τοΰτ' εστίν το ρήμα της πίστεως δ κηρύσσομεν.
(This is the word of faith which we proclaim.) 73 Then Paul moves
from the mouth in the citation to confession of faith with one's mouth
in w . 9a, 10b. The second citation from Isa. 28:16 is introduced by
'λέγει γαρ ή γραφή' (For Scripture says,.. .)' 74 To conclude the paragraph
in v. 13 a passage from Joel is cited: πας γαρ δς αν έπικαλέσηται το
δνομα κυρίου σωθήσεται. (For everyone who calls upon the name of
the Lord will be saved.)
The rhythmically arranged verses (w. 14-15) continue this emphasis
on the orality of the gospel, which appears from the repeated use of
the verbs έπικαλέω, ακούω and κηρύσσω. Furthermore, the two citations
from Isaiah (52:7 in v. 15 and 53.1 in v. 16) reinforce it with the verb
εύαγγελίζω ('proclaim the good news') and the noun ακοή ('what is
heard'). The figure of those who proclaim the good news seems to be
modeled after a herald, who is sent to announce the coming of the
king. The faculty of hearing is emphasized in the repeated ακοή of
75
v. 17. The quotation from Ps. 19 (18 in LXX) drives home to the
orality of the gospel although the psalmist was thinking of a silent
voice (Ps. 19:4!). 76
We must ask why Paul emphasizes the orality of the gospel in this
context. It is certainly true that it simply reflects the fact that the
gospel was communicated orally, but that can hardly be the only reason
for his emphasis especially in the light of the contrast to v. 5: Μωϋσης
γαρ γράφει την δικαιοσύνην την έκ [του] νόμου δτι ό ποιήσας αυτά
άνθρωπος ζήσεται έν αύτοΐς. 77 (For Moses writes concerning the right­
eousness from the Torah that the person who does them will live in/by
them.) While Paul thus introduces the Leviticus passage, the Deuteronomy
passage is introduced as the saying of the righteousness from faith.
Polemical reasons seem to lurk behind this apparent tension between
the oral gospel and the written Torah.
The repetition of 'mouth 5 and 'heart' is conspicuous in this section,
which is intended to expound the phrases (έν τφ στόματί σου and έν
τη καρδία σου) in the quotation of Deut. 30:14 in v. 8. 78 In connection
with the oral gospel it is apparent that the 'mouth' is related although
Paul connects it with confession here rather than with proclamation.
It is with the mouth that one proclaims the gospel, one confesses
Christ, and one calls upon the Lord. Then our question concerns the
connection of 'heart' with the oral gospel. According to Paul, when
one receives the Spirit one receives it into the heart (Gal. 4:6; 2 Cor.
1:22; Rom. 5:5). The heart is a neutral sphere, which can be bad or
good. Whether the heart is good or bad affects a whole person. Paul
describes those who are condemned by God as having 'bad' hearts. 79
Those in the opposite category, whether hypothetical or not, have the
work of the Torah written in their hearts (το έργον τοΰ νόμου γραπτον
έν ταΐς καρδίαις αυτών in 2:15) and circumcision of the heart by the
Spirit (περιτομή καρδίας έν πνεύματι in 2:29). 80 When Paul emphasizes
the sincerity of his desire, he refers to his own heart (9:2; 10:1). The
heart is certainly the seat of will, intentionality, emotions, and affections
(Rom. 6:17; 5:5; Phil. 1:7; 1 Thess. 2:4, 17), but it is the linchpin, so
to speak, of a whole human existence.
Kelber writes:
Spoken words enter the human heart and enjoy privileged participation in human
actuality... what enters the human heart affects a person's whole being. In
broader hermeneutical perspectives, spoken words are experienced personally and
more directly than written words. Sound has a pervasive quality; it permeates
one's whole physical existence. 81
Paul identifies 'the word in your mouth and in your heart' of Deut.
30:14 with 'the word of faith which we proclaim' in Rom. 10:8. This
identification implies that the verbal dynamics are involved in Paul's
proclamation of the gospel. Paul seems to be in agreement with Kelber
on the vitality of spoken words.
What becomes apparent in Paul's argument in Rom. 10 is the inti­
mate relation between mouth and heart, 82 which is particularly evident
in the parallel structures of w . 9 and 10:
δτι έάν όμολογησης έν τφ στόματί σου κύριον Ίησοΰν
και πιστεύσης έν τη καρδία σου δτι ò θεός αυτόν ήγειρεν έκ νεκρών,
σωθήση·
καρδία γαρ πιστεύεται εις δικαιοσυνην,
στόματί δε ομολογείται είς σωτηρίαν.
The close parallel structures make it plain that believing in one's
heart and confessing with one's mouth are not two separate actions.
They may be distinct, but not unrelated actions. They are the two
aspects of the saving faith, two sides of one coin. 83
It is not difficult to infer that for Paul the voice of the gospel reaches
the human heart more easily than the written Torah, but here we
must face the heart of the problem. It was customary to have the writ­
ten Torah read aloud at the synagogal worship. 84 Paul's letters were
written down and carried/sent to churches to be read aloud (e.g. I
Thess. 5:27). We must ask if it was legitimate for Paul to characterize
the Torah as written while the gospel is oral. It must also be asked if
he was justified in citing from Deut. 30 without a portion dealing with
deeds, and referring to it as fi the word of faith.'
The biblical passages Paul cites to promote his argument in connection
with the gospel can be classed with 'prophecy,' including those from
Deuteronomy. It may not be appropriate to classify the whole book of
Deuteronomy as 'prophecy,' but the passages Paul cites here are derived
from the prophetic section. In Deut. 30 Moses prophesies the future
restoration after God's curses have befallen the people of Israel, that
is, the return from exile. 85 Moses's song in Deut. 32 consists of various
materials. The very verse Paul quotes (i.e. v. 21 in Rom. 10:19) is sus­
ceptible to various interpretations, but his understanding of it in terms
of 'prophecy' becomes clear in the way he cites in his argument. Two
passages quoted from Isaiah follow this 'first' passage from Moses. The
ways in which the three citations are introduced are styled in a par­
allel fashion, but with some difference in wording (w. 19b, 20a, 21a): 86
πρώτος Μωϋσης λέγει·
Ησαΐας δε άποτολμφ και λέγει-
προς δε τον 'Ισραήλ λέγει-
It seems that Paul has deliberately collected the relevant 'prophecies'
to explain the situation of Israel concerning the gospel. This corresponds
well to his 'self-portrait' as an 'apostle of Gentiles' (11:13): he models
himself after the figure of Isaiah, a prophet or herald. 87 Although it is
true that there are prophetic writings in Scripture, a primary function
of a prophet is proclamation and acted parable. 88 Recording of prophecies
comes later. An extemporaneous and impromptu proclamation/
speech is susceptible to God's control and inspiration. It can be gen­
eralized as that prophets prefer oral communication to written com­
munication. The tendency is obvious in the typical introduction to a
89
prophecy, "Thus says the Lord (i"D ΐΤΙΓΡ ΊΒΚ).' Since Paul considers
himself to be a 'prophet,' an authoritative proclaimer of the gospel, it
can be concluded that he shows preference for orality. When Paul
states that Moses writes about the righteousness from the Torah, there
must be an intention to emphasize the tension between the gospel and
the Torah from the perspective of orality and literacy. At the same
time it is implied that tension derives from the tension between the
prophetic section of Scripture and the Torah. 90
If we are right in understanding that Paul has some preference for
orality because of his self-image as a 'prophet,' we must now ask if it
is legitimate for him to 'edit' the biblical prophecies when he quotes
and claims their fulfillment. To put it another way, we must ask why
Paul chooses Deut. 30:12-14 and introduces it as the saying of
the righteousness from faith in opposition to the righteousness from
the Torah although the passage is making virtually the same point as
Lev. 18:5.
There is no way of knowing the exact text of Paul's Scripture for
certain. 91 However, the text of Romans 10:6-8 seems to reflect Paul's
interests. For instance, no reference to the Torah or deed is found.
Paul obviously presents a christological 'interpretation' of that 'quota­
tion.' Besides, a parallelism between v. 6bc and v. 7 is striking.
Hence, we can probably attribute the final text of the 'quotation'
to him. 92 Here simply for the sake of convenience we assume that Paul
had the text of the Göttingen LXX project 93 in front of him without
implying that is the exact text he actually had and worked from.
Not only Paul's interpretation of Deut. 30:12-14 seems to contradict
its original meaning and intention in the original context, 94 but also
he has reworked the text of Deut. 30 considerably as he cites it in
Rom. 10. It is especially evident in 10:7, which diverges from the text
of Deut. 30:13; Paul writes 'τίς καταβήσεται εις την αβυσσον;' (who
ς
will descend into the abyss?) while Deut. 30:13 reads τίς διαπεράσει
ήμίν εις το πέραν της θαλάσσης;' (who will go over the sea for us?).
While in the context of Deuteronomy the main thrust of the passage
concerns the practicability of the commandments in the Torah, no ref­
erence to deeds, doing or obeying is found in Paul's 'quotation.' Scholars
have been dealing with this question for some time, and there are
scholars who explicitly deny Paul's apparent intention to quote a pas­
sage from Scripture. Quite a few have understood that Paul is not
interpreting the passage in Deuteronomy, but simply making use of its
language to express his own ideas. 95 Some characterize it as a prover­
bial and familiar saying, but see no intention on Paul's part to base
his argument on Scripture. 96
Recently it has become more common to accept the text of Rom.
10:6-8 as some sort of quotation from Scripture and to attempt to
explain Paul's interpretation by appealing to various texts of Jewish
literature on the assumption that Paul's interpretation either made use
of or was influenced by contemporary interpretations. In other words,
while his interpretation may not make much sense to us, it must have
done so to his contemporaries. The Jewish writings which have been
97
mentioned in this connection are Targum Neofiti, Baruch and Philo etc.
On the basis of the alleged striking similarities between Rom. 10:6-8
98
and Targum Neofiti on Deut. 30:12-14 S. Lyonnet and M. McNamara"
argue that Paul knew the paraphrase of the text of Deut. 30 reflected
in Targum Neofiti and adapted it for his purpose. 100 We can say that
the similarities are impressive, but it is probably an overstatement to
say that they 'can scarcely be due to pure accident.' 101 It is extremely
difficult to date the targumim and targumic traditions. We can legitimately
say that Diez Macho's arguments for the pre-Christian dating 102 is not
conclusive, but it is certainly possible that some of the tradition of
Targum Neofiti derives from the pre-Christian period. The targumic ref­
erences to Moses in connection with the ascent to heaven and Jonah
in connection with the descent into the depths of the great sea are
not found in Paul's 'quotation.' It is possible that Paul knew (part of)
the targumic tradition and made use of it for his argument. I wonder
if he really needed such a tradition to modify the scriptural citation.
Bar. 3:29-30 presents an interpretation of Deut. 30:12-14 in terms
of Wisdom tradition. The Wisdom tradition personifies and identifies
Wisdom with the Torah (e.g. Sir. 24). The idea that Wisdom is inac­
cessible to men is expressed by the symbols of 'heaven' and 'sea.' It
is argued that Paul is extending the traditional identification of Wisdom
with the Torah to the equation Wisdom=Torah=Christ. It is impor­
tant to notice that Baruch speaks of the gracious election of Israel and
his gift of the Torah (= Wisdom) to the point that 'Baruch affirms of
the Torah what Paul affirms of Christ: that by this instrument "the
103
word is near you.'"
It is quite possible that Paul was aware of all or some of these inter­
pretative traditions, but we probably cannot identify the 'source' behind
his citation. Maybe we should not assume a single source. Various
kinds of interpretation could have been floating around him at the
time. Richard B. Hays has pursued the question by taking the effect
of intertextual echo seriously. By introducing a citation from Deut.
30:12-14 with Deut. 9:4 Paul echoes the idea that the covenant depends
on God's grace rather than on Israel's own righteousness (Deut. 9:4-6).
By echoing the Wisdom tradition found in Job, Baruch and Sirach,
Paul implies that the word of God spoken in the Torah is identical
with the Wisdom of God in the person of Jesus Messiah. Hays has
convincingly argued that Paul's evocation of Deut. 9:4 and of the
Wisdom tradition creates intertextual echoes, which suggest that Paul's
interpretation is less arbitrary than it sounds. 104
The basic question we must face here is the rationale behind Paul's
seemingly arbitrary and flexible attitude towards the scriptural text
when he cites. Hays's intertextual approach alleviates its arbitrariness
somewhat, but he has no intention to defend Paul's exegesis. Nor do
I have any intention to defend his exegesis, but I should like to pinpoint
the reason why he chooses this scriptural passage and applies it to the
christological events contrary to its apparent and original intention to
encourage doing commandments of the Torah. The intertextual echoes
Hays has pointed out seem to guide us in the right direction.
It seems that the key concept is prophetic. Paul seems to be willing
to employ for his purpose whichever part of Scripture as long as he
understands it as prophetic and having been fulfilled. Although Deut.30:12-14 belongs to the Pentateuch, the Torah, he cites it in the middle
of his argument as the saying of 'the righteousness from faith,' because
he regards it as prophetic (and it is!). Such an approach to Deut. 30
is further justified if the contemporary Jews perceive that they are still
105
in a state of 'exile' because the passage looks beyond the dispersion
of Israel. Hays's intertextual analysis reveals his awareness of this
106
prophetic nature, but he does not seem to regard it as decisive as
I do. Not only is the passage prophetic, Paul firmly believes that it is
fulfilled. With the conviction that he is living at the time of fulfillment
of scriptural prophecies, he rereads and reinterprets Scripture. 107
Once a prophecy is fulfilled, its meaning tends to change; while
prior to its fulfillment a prophecy is prospective, it becomes retrospective
once it is fulfilled. To complicate the matter, prophecies in general do
not seem to presuppose that there is a single fulfillment of a prophecy.
From such a perspective we should consider the possibility that fulfillment
happens in a series of fulfillments instead of in one fulfillment. In that
respect we should say that Paul is conscious of living in the tension
between the already and the not yet, i.e between what is fulfilled and
what awaits fulfillment.
With the conviction that the 'prophecy' to observe the Torah is
partially fulfilled in Jesus's earthly life, Paul may have thought that it
is no longer binding on the people of God as before. Although his
reading may often appear arbitrary to our modem critical mind, he
seems to find no problem with it. While his reading was probably
accepted widely among those who shared his eschatological consciousness,
it was probably rejected outright among those who did not share his
eschatological awareness, in the same manner as he used to persecute
Christians prior to his conversion and call. If so, the challenge, which
is often posed, that this way of arguing would not persuade the non-
Christian Jews may not be relevant.
Since Paul understands Deut. 30 as one of the prophecies decisively
fulfilled in Jesus's earthly life, he reinterprets the passage as the saying
of 'the righteousness from faith' from the vantage point of the decisive
fulfillment. He could easily read Deut. 30:12, 13 as referring to Jesus's
descent into the Hades and ascent into heaven (possibly incarnation
and resurrection?). Inevitably he deletes anything connected with doing
or deeds, which he finds irrelevant. This sort of rereading and rein-
terpretation of Scripture is certainly different from what we normally
regard as exegesis. Paul probably has no intention, nor had he any
claim to do exegesis. 108 As has been frequendy pointed out, there is
much in common between Paul's eschatological reinterpretation and
Qumran pesher. Not only a formal similarity but also a conceptual sim­
ilarity exists between Paul's interpretation of scriptural prophecies and
Qumran pesher. Formally the triple τουτ' εστίν resembles ς Π03' (its
interpretation is/concerns) in Qumran pesher. There is nothing pecu­
liar about the phrase, τοΰτ' εστίν, itself, which has a much wider cur­
rency, 109 but the way Paul employs it here resembles "TtóS in Qumran
pesher in that both introduce its eschatological interpretation with ref-
erence to their contemporary events. 110
In contrast to Paul's similarity to Qumran pesher interpretation Philo
presents a strikingly different attitude towards the interpretation of
Deut. 30. Since its quotation and paraphrase occur quite often in his
writings, Deut. 30:12-14 must be one of Philo's favorite passages. It
is not difficult to see why Jews in the diaspora would have found the
passage appealing since it concerns the restoration of the Jewish people
after their dispersion due to their disobedience to God. However, his
reading of Deut. 30 can hardly be eschatological. He seems to be pri­
marily concerned with the three faculties of the body—mouth, heart
112
and hands—which he has found in the text of LXX, and understands
as symbols of words, thoughts and actions. In the context of an exhor­
tation to repentance, i.e. to become a proselyte (Virt. 175-82), Philo
introduces his interpretation of Deut. 30:11-14. He asserts that corre­
spondence among words, thoughts and actions is vital for praiseworthy
and perfect life, which is pleasing to God. In this context Philo cites
from Deut. 26:17,18, which refers to the pledge to make the Lord
one's God, to observe his commandments and to obey the divine voice.
In the other passage where he treats Deut. 30:11-14 Philo makes clear
that the correspondence must be one for good. 113 Although Praem. Poen.
as a whole treats an eschatological matter, that is, eschatological rewards
and punishments, his interpretation of Deut. 30:11-14 in Praem. Poen.
80-83 is scarcely eschatological. He again stresses the importance of
correspondence between words, thoughts and actions in obeying God's
commandments. 114
We have argued that Paul stresses the orality of his gospel because
he views himself as a 'prophet'; orality is congenial to prophecy. From
that perspective he introduces Lev. 18:5 as the writing of Moses about
'the righteousness from the Torah' and Deut. 30:12-14 as the saying
of 'the righteousness from faith.' With the conviction that he is now
living at the time of fulfillment, the eschaton, he reinterprets the scriptural
'prophecies,' and that, in turn, results in his relatively flexible attitude
towards the scriptural text. Even when he employs an expression like
καθώς γέγραπται (just as it is written), his basic attitude and treatment
of the texts remains the same. This is due to the divine authority
which he recognizes in such texts. In that sense Paul understands these
texts introduced with γέγραπται as 'prophetic,' and has no intention to
stress their literacy. He probably intends to focus on the divine voice
speaking through the written 'prophecies.'
Both prophets and gospel preachers communicate their messages
orally. Paul has deliberately formed a contrast between the written
Torah and the oral gospel in Romans 10. Orality is congenial to
prophecy. When he quotes from Deut. 30:12-14 as the saying of 'the
righteousness from faith,' he understands the passage as the 'prophecy'
fulfilled in Jesus's earthly life. From that vantage point he reinterprets
and quotes it without any reference to doing the commandment. This
new interpretation that deletes part of the deuteronomic passage is
justified presumably because Paul supposes that obedience to the Torah
has already been fulfilled in Jesus's earthly life and above all in the
crucifixion. The context of Deut. 30 justifies his interpretation of the
passage in terms of 'prophecy.' It must also be noted that since Paul
was living in the tension, between the 'already' and the 'not yet,' his
attitude towards Scripture in general is more complex than what is
stated above. For instance, while he cites from Deut. 30 without making
reference to doing the commandment, he could still draw ethical teach­
ings from the Torah elsewhere (e.g. Rom. 12 and 13).
If we understand Romans 10 correctly, Paul's approach to the Torah
seems to tally with his programmatic statement in Rom. 3:20-21. On
the basis of Ps. 143 (LXX; 142):2 he declares that no one is justified
by works of the Torah before God (εξ έργων νόμου ου δικαιωθησεται
πάσα σαρξ ενώπιον αύτοΰ), but that the righteousness of God is man­
ifested apart from the Torah, being witnessed by the Torah and the
prophets (νυνί δε χωρίς νόμου δικαιοσύνη θεού πεφανέρωται μαρτυρουμένη
υπό του νόμου και των προφητών). The saving efficacy of the Torah is
explicitly denied while its prophetic function is affirmed. In addition
the prophetic nature of the Scripture is emphasized throughout Romans
(Cf. 1:2; 15:4).
In our initial survey we have negatively treated Käsemann's inter-
pretation of Rom. 10 in terms of the contrast between γράμμα and
πνεύμα. However, I must admit that my conclusion is not so far from
his as it seems at first sight. It was understood that prophetic utterances
are dictated by God's spirit. If we are right in understanding that Paul
takes Deut. 30 as prophetic, then we could state that Deut. 30 represents
God's πνεύμα in that sense. Yet our initial criticism that Käsemann
reads too much into the context still stands.
Rom. 10 occupies a central place in the larger section, chapters 9-11,
where Paul struggles with the problem of the Jewish rejection of the
gospel; a majority of Paul's Jewish contemporaries have not yet believed
the gospel; he is afraid that they are excluded from salvation and he
eagerly prays for their salvation. 115 Although I have attempted to shed
some light on Rom. 10 from the perspective of orality and literacy,
Paul's emphasis apparendy lies on the oral gospel rather than on the
written Torah. He squarely faces the fact that many Jews have not
believed in the oral gospel, but his optimistic tone seems to be heard
in his emphasis on the orality of the gospel.
To conclude this study something must be said about τέλος νόμου
of Rom. 10:4. First of all it must be noted that Rom. 10:4 is not
Paul's general statement about the relation between the gospel and the
Torah. Paul's overall understanding of the Torah is not necessarily
relevant for our interpretation of τέλος νόμου here. If our perception
of the contrast between 10:5 and 10:6-8 in terms of orality and literacy
is correct, it points in the direction of the interpretation of τέλος as
'termination.' However, not only τέλος but also the meaning of νόμος
can be a point of issue although much has not yet been said about
it, at least in comparison with τέλος. If Paul means the νόμος in terms
of 'the righteousness from the Torah' (10:5), τέλος probably means
'termination.' Paul is capable of using the language quite creatively
and flexibly. He expresses his awareness of the 'prophetic' nature of
the Torah in 3:21. Furthermore, he has managed to create the phrase
νόμος πίστεως and employs it in 3:27 creatively. The meaning of νόμος
in this phrase has been much debated, but if my interpretation is cor­
rect 116 and its meaning can be applied to the νόμος in 10:4, then the
ideological interpretation (i.e. goal, fulfillment, climax) of τέλος is
arguable. Although it is true that the immediate context usually deter­
mines the meaning rather than the distant one, it seems, on the whole,
that we must be content with an inconclusive result. A somewhat
ambiguous translation like 'end' seems to have to be preferred.
