Johannine scholars have long noticed similarities between the Qumran
1
pesharim and the Fourth Gospel in their approaches to the OT. Barnabas
Lindars asserted in 1961 that the writer of the Fourth Gospel "accepted
the general contentions of the pesher method," and made use of the
pesher exegesis of his community. 2 More recendy, Richard Longenecker
has claimed that in the Fourth Gospel, "a pesher type of interpreta-
tion is dominant," 3 and Maarten Menken has suggested that the evan-
gelist practiced a kind of pesher exegesis akin to that found at Qumran. 4
These assertions, while relatively frequent, are usually made en pas-
sant—there is a surprising lack of extended comparisons of the use of
Scripture in the Qumran pesharim and the Fourth Gospel. 5 This essay
is an attempt to fill that gap and to move the discussion toward greater
methodological clarity. After emphasizing the importance of definitions
and the need for broad-based comparisons, I will discuss several sim-
ilarities between the Fourth Gospel and the pesharim, including an often-
overlooked similarity in formal structure.
At least two problems may be observed in scholarly comparisons of
the Fourth Gospel's use of the OT and pesher exegesis. First, as already
noted, such comparisons are almost always made very briefly, often
without a careful definition of what exactìy pesher exegesis is. 6 Alternatively,
individual features of Johannine exegesis and the pesharim are some-
times isolated and compared. 7 Contrary to such approaches, it would
seem that a meaningful comparison between the Fourth Gospel and
the pesharim should begin with a clear and fully-orbed understanding
of what pesher exegesis is. After identifying the defining characteristics
of the pesher genre, we will be in a better position to compare the full
range of these characteristics rather than isolating individual characteristics
for comparison. 8
What exactly are the pesharim, then, and how should the genre be
defined? Should content, exegetical technique, terminology, authorship,
structure, setting, or some combination of these factors have primacy
in determining which works belong to the genre and which do not?
A sizeable literature has been devoted to this question, 9 and I do not
pretend to offer a definitive solution to the debate here. Nevertheless,
a few points may be noted. First, a helpful definition of the genre will
be fairly broad, taking into account several factors and recognizing
that they may interact in complex ways, rather than isolating a sin-
gle, monolithic factor as determinative. 10 Secondly, the term 'pesher'
should not be considered as constitutive of the genre, as is evident
from the fact that it does not always appear in the Qumran pesher
texts that otherwise share fundamental similarities in form and con-
tent. 11 Thirdly, I would suggest that form and content must be the
primary factors in defining the pesher genre, 12 with exegetical technique
considered as a secondary factor. As will be suggested below, it is
the combination of form and content that distinguishes the pesharim as a
separate genre.
The basic form of the Qumran pesharim may be described as a 'lem­
14
mario structure,' in which a text of Scripture (the lemma) is quoted,
followed by an introductory formula, and identified with a contemporary
15
figure or situation. It is important to note that this structure is flexible,
and variations are quite common. For instance, although the intro­
ductory formula frequently uses the word 'pesher,' other formulae may
also be used. 16 Moreover, some of the pesharim may repeat parts of the
OT citation and follow these repeated fragments with further inter­
pretations. 17 An illustration of the basic lemmatic structure of the pesharim
may be taken from lQpHab2:10-12: 18
[Citation of Hab. 1:6]: "For see, I will mobilize the Chaldaeans, a cruel [and
determined people"
Introductory formula: Its interpretation [DUS] concerns . . .
Contemporary figure:... the Kittim, wh[o ar]e swift and powerful in battle...
This structure is common to the three main types οι pesharim: the
continuous pesharim (e.g. lQpHab, 4QpNah), which provide running
commentary on 5-6 minor prophets, parts of Isaiah, and parts of the
Psalms; the thematic pesharim (e.g. 4QFlor, HQMelch), which group
OT texts and their interpretations around a particular theme; and the
isolated pesharim (e.g. 1QS 8:14-16; CD 4:12-19) which occur in works
20
that otherwise do not belong to the pesher genre.
However, although this lemmatic structure is a necessary part of
the pesher genre, it is not sufficient by itself to define the genre. As
Silberman has demonstrated, the lemmatic structure of the pesharim is
closely paralleled in some midrashic literature, particularly in the petirah
midrash. 21 It is the combination of structure and content that defines the
pesharim as a separate genre. This content is chiefly characterized by
two features. First, because the OT text is understood to have a secret
meaning referring to the last days (in which the Qumran community
perceives itself to be living), a strong 'contemporizing' of the OT texts
is evident throughout the pesharim. The true, hidden meaning of the
OT texts refers to the eschatological events of the Qumran community.
Secondly, because the true meaning of the Scriptures is hidden in the
written text of the OT, these mysteries must be brought to light by
divine revelation. Accordingly, we encounter the claim that the mean­
ing of the OT texts has been revealed by God to certain interpreters,
chiefly the Teacher of Righteousness. 22
Brooke concludes, based on his primary generic criteria of form and
content and the secondary criterion of exegetical technique, that the
Qumran commentaries are best classified as 'Qumran midrashim,' and
that perhaps it would be best to drop the term pesher altogether. 23 What
are we to make of this claim? The question of how the pesharim relate
to Jewish midrash is a vexed one, debated ever since William Brownlee,
the first editor of the Habakkuk commentary, characterized the pesharim
as 'midrash pesher.' 24 The lines of the debate were drawn early: Brown-
lee emphasized the use of midrashic techniques in the pesharim, while
Karl Elliger stressed the essentially revealed nature of the pesher exegesis,
comparing it to the dream interpretations of Daniel. 25
While not pretending to offer a solution here, we may note that
although there are certainly close links between the pesharim and some
midrashic literature in terms of lemmatic structure and exegetical tech-
nique, 26 there are marked differences in content. The midrashim, while
certainly seeking to apply the OT text to contemporary needs, 27 do
not 'contemporize' the text with the rigor of the pesharim, which con-
sistently interpret the OT eschatologically to refer to the events occur-
ring within the Qumran community. 28 Moreover, the claim of the
pesharim to be 'revealed interpretation' also distinguishes them from
much midrashic literature, 29 and suggests a background in the dream
interpretation of Daniel and other Jewish literature. 30 In sum, the
pesharim share features with the midrashim and the tradition of dream
interpretation, but are distinct from both. Therefore, it seems to me
that Brooke goes too far in speaking of 'Qumran midrashim.' 31
The upshot of this discussion is that the pesher genre should be
classified with attention to a range of factors, chief among them lemmatic
structure and eschatological, contemporizing content derived through
'revealed mterpretation.' Exegetical technique is a secondary consideration.
One factor alone is not sufficient to define the genre—rather, form
(structure) and content must be considered together. This broad-based
definition of the pesharim suggests that when we compare them with
the Fourth Gospel, it is important to give attention to the whole range
of factors that define the genre.
When the use of the OT in the Fourth Gospel is compared with
pesher exegesis in terms of structure, content, and exegetical technique,
certain similarities are evident. We will begin by comparing content
and exegetical technique before suggesting an overlooked structural
parallel in the fourth part of this essay.
As noted above, one distinctive feature of the content of the pesharim
is the claim that its interpretations of Scripture are divinely revealed.
These claims are clear examples of the phenomenon of 'charismatic
exegesis, 5 or 'revealed interpretation,' evident in much early Jewish lit-
erature. 32 Two such claims are found in the pesher on Habakkuk:
lQpHab 2:7-9 . . . when they hear all that is going to co[me up]on the last
generation from the mouth of the priest into [whose heart] God put [under-
standi]ng to interpret all the words of his servants the prophets.. , 33
lQpHab 7:4-5 Its interpretation concerns the Teacher of Righteousness, to whom
God has made known all the mysteries of the words of his servants, the prophets.
Saeed Hamid-Khani has noted that the Fourth Gospel and
Qumran pesharim share "obvious similarities," and yet concludes
the similarities are "more of an appearance than reality." 34 Among
main differences noted by Hamid-Khani is that, unlike Qumran,

evangelist does not claim to have an exclusive revelation of the mean-
ing of the Scriptures. However, although few scholars have argued this
case, I suggest that John 6:45 is just such a claim. 35 Here, Jesus asserts
in the midst of an exegetical debate over the meaning of the OT cita-
tion in John 6:31 that the Jews should not grumble concerning his
claim to be the 'bread' of 6:31, because only those whom the Father
draws are able to come to him. To explain this claim, Jesus quotes
Isa. 54:13, "And they will all be taught by God." It seems likely that
the divine instruction spoken of in this context refers to the revelation
of the true meaning of the Scriptures. According to the evangelist, it
is only through the authoritative instruction of Jesus (6:46) and the
Spirit (2:17, 22; 12:14-16; 14:26) that the Scriptures may be fully
understood.
The other fundamental feature of the content of the pesharim noted
above is the claim that the OT texts properly interpreted speak of the
eschatological events occurring within the life of the Qumran com-
munity. 36 There are several indications that in an analogous fashion,
the evangelist understands the true meaning of the OT to be the events
surrounding Jesus' life. Thus, for instance, the formula "I am" is used
to identify John the Baptist as the voice calling in the wilderness (1:23)
and Jesus as the bread from heaven (6:31-58). 37 The disciples realize
that Psa. 69:10 refers to Jesus' cleansing of the Temple (2:17), and
remember later that Zech. 9:9 was "written of him" (12:14-16). The
prophet Isaiah "spoke" Isa. 53:1 and 6:10 because he saw Jesus' glory
and "spoke of him" (12:41). The Scriptures speak of Jesus' resurrection
from the dead (20:9). Moses and the prophets wrote of Jesus (1:45;
5:46), and the Scriptures bear witness to Jesus (5:39). Not all of the
OT texts applied to Jesus axe straightforwardly prophetic (e.g. 12:37-
41): nevertheless, through various means (e.g. typology) the evangelist
understands them to speak of Jesus. 38 The full meaning of the Scriptures
is brought out when its reference to Jesus is uncovered.
Scholars differ on the number of explicit Scripture citations in the
Fourth Gospel, but a generous list includes 1:23; 2:17; 6:31, 45; 7:37-38,
42; 8:17; 10:34; 12:13-15, 34, 38, 40; 13:18; 15:25; 17:12; 19:24, 28,
36-37. 39 Of these, seven (beginning from John 12) are introduced with a
'fulfillment formula 5 (12:38; 13:18; 15:25; 17:12; 19:24, 28, 36-37). 40
These seven fulfillment formulae demonstrate that the evangelist read
the OT as referring to the eschatological events surrounding the life
of Jesus, but the same assumption seems evident in many of the other
OT citations. 41
As noted above, the Qumran peshxmm use many of the exegetical
techniques common to early Judaism. The same is quite clearly the
case for at least certain sections of the Fourth Gospel. 42 Rather than
dealing with all the exegetical methods common to the two corpora,
we will note one interesting similarity. The evangelist makes numer-
ous changes to the Scriptures that he cites, and uses the textual tra-
ditions that most clearly bring out the point he wishes to make. One
good example of this is the citation of Isa. 6:10 in John 12:40. Here,
it seems likely that the evangelist, contrary to his normal preference
for the Greek OT, cites from a Hebrew text, revocalizing the two
Hebrew verbs as hiphil perfects instead of imperatives. 43 These changes
are more likely due to intentional redaction than to loose citation or
poor memory. 44 The evangelist's willingness to alter the Scripture text
for theological reasons, or to use various textual traditions, is similar
45
to changes and text selections in pesher interpretation.
We may now compare the structure οι pesher exegesis with that of
the OT exegesis in the Fourth Gospel. Here we note that John 6:31-58
has generally been overlooked in comparisons of the exegesis of the
Fourth Gospel and the Qumran pesharim. In fact, Lindars suggests that
the two OT citations in 6:31 and 6:45 reflect a later struggle in the
time of the evangelist, and distinguishes them from the other, earlier
pesher citations in the Fourth Gospel. 46 However, because our approach
is to compare with the Fourth Gospel the full range of factors that
constitute the pesharim rather than simply one feature or another, we are
interested also in structural similarities. And John 6:31-58 appears to
share some interesting similarities in structure with the Qumran pesharim.
In his influential 1965 monograph, Peder Borgen demonstrated that
John 6:31-58, like Philo and the Palestinian midrashim, paraphrases
words from an OT citation and combines them with haggadic tradi­
tions. 47 More specifically, Borgen demonstrated the presence of an
exegetical pattern common to John, Philo, and the midrashim, in which
an OT citation is divided and explained sequentially. The OT is cited
in John 6:31: αρτον εκ του ουρανού εδωκεν αύτοίς φαγείν. 48 Vv 32-48
paraphrase and discuss the first part of the citation ("He gave them
bread from heaven"), while w 49-58 paraphrase and discuss the final
word ("to eat"). 49 Borgen's argument that 6:32-58 is a sequential exe-
gesis of ν 31 has been widely accepted, and sometimes developed fur­
50
ther, by other scholars.
Borgen suggested in passing that the method of 'midrashic para­
phrase' identified in John 6:32-58 was also used at Qumran, but did
51
not develop this insight. Indeed, Borgen's work contains a very light
52
treatment of the DSS, citing only a few passages from 1QS and CD.
The work done above on the structure of the pesharim allows us to
confirm and bring more specificity to Borgen's assertion of similarity
between Qumran exegesis and the exegesis of John 6:32-58. We may
note that the sequential pattern of explanation observed in John 6:32-58
finds many analogies specifically in the pesharim, in which the OT is
frequendy explained verse by verse, phrase by phrase, or even word
by word. 53 In general terms, John 6:31-58 fits the lemmatic pattern of
the pesharim described by George Brooke: an OT text is cited (6:31)
and then interpreted (6:32-58). 54
Further similarities emerge when we examine the terminology of
6:31-58 more closely. In the w 32-58, two formulae are used in order
to identify the άρτος of ν 31 as Jesus: i. "I am/this i s . . . (fragment
of Scripture citation)"; ii. "this (i.e. Scripture fragment) i s . . ," 55 The
former moves from a contemporary person or event back to Scripture,
while the latter formula begins with the fragment of the Scripture cita­
tion and moves to the contemporary figure. In John 6:31-58, both for­
mulae are employed to declare the eschatological fulfillment of the
Scripture citation in Jesus. Both formulae appear also in the Qumran
pesharim in order to offer an eschatological interpretation of Scripture
texts. The practice of citing a Scripture passage and then combining
fragments of that passage with identification formulae is common in
1
the pesharim? and appears to be the exegetical procedure used in John
6:31-58. We may examine each of these two identification formulae
in turn:
i. The four "I am" sayings in 6:35-51 refer to the "bread from heaven"
in 6:31. 58
6:35
6:41
6:48
6:51
59
εγώ ειμί ò aproe της ζωής
εγώ είμι o aproe ό καταβας εκ του ουρανού
Έγώ είμι ο άρτος της ζωής
έγώ ειμί o aproe ό ζών ò εκ του ουρανού καταβάς
Several variations of the same identification formula may be noted
in the Fourth Gospel itself: 1:23 identifies the Baptist as the "voice"
from Isa. 40:3: έγώ φωνή βοώντος εν τη έρήμω, and 5:35 identifies the
Baptist as the "lamp" from LXX Psa. 131:17: εκείνος ήν ò λύγν(κ ò
καιόμενος και φαίνων. 60 A similar formula, ουτός έστιν, is used in ν 50
and ν 58:
6:50
6:58
ουτός έστιν ο άρτος ό εκ του ουρανού καταβαίνων
ουτός έστιν ο άρτος ό έξ ουρανού καταβάς
Although neither the ουτός in 6:50 nor the one in 6:58 has a proper
antecedent, 61 it seems clear that both refer to the person or "flesh" (in
6:58) of Jesus. 62 In this case, the meaning is, "This (i.e. my flesh) is
the 'bread from heaven 5 spoken of in the Scriptures." 63
The Qumran pesharim contain similar identification formulae in which
a pronoun immediately precedes a Scripture citation (or a fragment
thereof) in order to identify a contemporary person or event with that
which is spoken of in the Scriptures. lQpHab 9:3f provides a good
example. In 9:3-4, the writer quotes Hab. 2:8a: "Since you pillaged
many peoples all the rest of the nations will pillage you." The con­
temporizing interpretation of this verse follows in 9:4, using the typical
"pesher" formula. The author asserts that Hab. 2:8a refers to the plun­
dering of the last priests in Jerusalem, whose "riches and loot" will be
seized by the army of the Kittim. Then, in lQpHab 9:7, the Kittim
(mentioned in 9:6-7) are identified with a repeated fragment of the
Hab. 2:8a citation, using the formula WPP ΊΓΡ Γ\ΏΠ: "they [i.e. the
Kittim] are 'the rest of the nations' [Hab. 2:8] ," 64
A similar formula can be used with the citation itself, rather than
a repeated fragment of the citation. 4QpIsa b (4Q162) 2:7, referring to
the scoffers in Jerusalem, uses the identification formula: ΓΠΓΡ ΓΓΠΠ ΠΚ
10ΚΏ ΊϋΚ QH: "they [i.e. the scoffers in Jerusalem] are the ones who
'Have rejected the Law of YHWH and mocked the word of the Holy
One of Israel...' [Isa. 5:24f]." 65
ii. A second identification formula is employed in 6:51, this time
moving from the Scripture citation in 6:31 to Jesus' "flesh": και ο άρτος
δε δν έγώ δώσω ή σαρξ μου έστιν. This formula is particularly com­
mon in the Qumran pesharim, although it can be found also in Philo.
Borgen notes two examples:
Leg all 11:86 à γαρ άκρότομος πέτρα ή σοφία του θεοΰ έστιν ("For 'the flinty
rock' [Deut. 8:15] is the wisdom of God")
CD 6:4 ΓΠΤΓΠ ΚΠ ΊΚ3Π ('"the well' [Num. 21:18] is the law") 66
To these examples we may add another from the Damascus
Document:
CD 6:7 ΓΓΠΓΠ ΒΓΤΠ Hfl ρρΤΠΡΓΤΙ ("'the staff* [Num. 21:18] is the interpreter of
the law")
Even more interesting are several identification formulae from 4QpNah
(4Q169) Frags 3-4, column i:8-column ii:l. Phrases from the citation
of Nah. 2:14 in col i:8-10 are repeated in the passage, and each one
67
is given in turn an eschatological identification:
Column i:10
Column i:10-ll
Column i: 11
Column ii: 1
fPTT ΉΓυ Dil ΠΡ31Ί ('"your throng'
of soldiers")
1*TTÜ ΠΠ ΤΠΕΗΙ ('"his cubs' [Nah.
ΕΛΒΠΤ *3[ΓΤΟ Ί^]ηρ ΊϋΚ ]"ΙΠΠ ΚΠ
2:14] is the wealth which [the pries]ts
[Nah. 2:14] are his gangs
2:14] are his nobles")
1ΒΊΡ1 ('"his spoils' [Nah.
of Jerusalem accumulated]
ΕΓΙΏ TU> ÜTp VOW tob "IÜK ITS Dil TOBfrPI ('"his messengers'
[Nah. 2:14] are his emissaries, whose voice will no longer be
heard among die nations")
These examples, in which fragments of an OT citation are inter-
preted eschatologically, are variations of the lemmatic structure of the
pesharim described above, even though they do not use the word "pesher."
The identification formula in John 6:51 is therefore the closest paral-
lel to the basic lemmatic structure of the pesharim.
One interesting result of our study is the observation that John 6:31-
58 is one of the most pesher-lìke passages in the Fourth Gospel. Not
only does it display the basic lemmatic structure of the pesharim, it also
uses identification formulae quite similar to that of the pesharim. In
addition, it uses midrashic techniques, contains a claim to revealed
exegesis (6:45-46), and applies the OT text in 6:31 eschatologically.
The claim that Jesus is the 'bread from heaven 5 reveals the true mean-
ing of the OT passage cited in 6:31, a meaning not entirely obvious
from the OT text itself.
However, it must be said that while we have demonstrated some
similarities between the Fourth Gospel and the Qumran pesharim in
structure, content, and exegetical method, there are also quite clearly
some significant differences. First, in terms of structure, although John
6:31-58 shows some general similarities with the pesharim, there is no
sustained running commentary of an extended OT passage like we
find in the continuous pesharim, nor is there a thematic grouping of
interpreted texts comparable to the thematic pesharim. In the pesharim,
we find the text of the OT and the interpretation of the OT set out
much more clearly and systematically than is in the case in John 6:31-58.
At most, we have in John 6:31-58 something analogous to the isolated
pesharim. Similar identification formulae are used, but the term pesher
never appears in the Fourth Gospel. Moreover, apart from 6:31-58,
there do not appear to be other exegeses of the OT in the Fourth
Gospel in which the structure of the pesharim is paralleled.
Secondly, according to the evangelist, the OT prophets saw the
events of the future with considerable detail: Isaiah wrote what he did
because he saw the glory of Jesus 'and spoke of him 5 (12:41, cp. 8:56).
This contrasts with lQpHab 7:1-5, in which there is much about the
future the prophets do not know, with the result that the Teacher of
Righteousness understands better than they what they wrote.
Finally, the similar identification formulae described above highlight
an important difference in content. The identification formula "I am"
is not used in the Qumran pesharim because the eschatological inter-
pretation of the Scriptures does not generally relate to the one inter-
preting the text. The "I am" identification formula of the Fourth Gospel
is due in part to a unique situation: Jesus, the authoritative interpreter
of the Scriptures, asserts that the revealed interpretation of those
Scriptures points to himself.TM This radically Christo-centric hermeneutic 69
sets the evangelist apart from the pesharim. Jesus comes with a new
interpretation of the Scriptures, but ironically, his teaching of the
Scriptures points beyond those Scriptures to a new and fuller revelation of
God in himself. Such is not the case in the pesharim, where the Scriptures
are properly interpreted (through divine revelation), but do not point
beyond themselves to a source of greater revelation.
While some interesting similarities have emerged from our broad-
based comparison of the two corpora, these differences are significant
enough to discourage referring to the exegesis of the Fourth Gospel
as "pesher exegesis," as some scholars have done. 70 Perhaps the closest
thing to pesher exegesis in the Fourth Gospel is John 6:31-58. While it
is possible that the similarities are attributable to the direct influence
of Qumran upon the Fourth Gospel, 71 there is not sufficient evidence
to make such a claim. 72 Our study has shown, however, that some of
Borgen's midrashic parallels in the Fourth Gospel may be more closely
parallel to a pesher type of exegesis than to the midrashim. The simi-
larities of the Fourth Gospel with the exegesis of the pesharim in both
form and content may, in turn, bolster the case that the Fourth Gospel
is a 'sectarian' writing 73 employing 'charismatic exegesis.'