The New Testament does not abound in olfactory imagery, yet the motif
of fragrance is prominent in some memorable passages. The most explicit
scent metaphors are found in the Pauline literature, in 2 Cor 2:14-16,
Phil 4:18 and Eph 5:2 in particular. The Evangelists appear to have less
interest in scent. Even though all the four Gospels contain some version
of the anointing of Jesus by a woman, where the olfactory aspect is
implicitly present, only the author of the Fourth Gospel explicitly com-
ments on the aroma of the anointing oil. Notably, John 12:3 is the only
place in the New Testament where the substantive οσμή occurs outside of
the Pauline corpus.
The scarcity of olfactory images and the fact that except for Phil 4:18,
they are all in some way associated with Jesus, has made it easier for inter­
preters to conflate them, with little regard for individual contexts. We find
this tendency already in patristic literature. Contemporary scholars are
more cautious in this respect, yet even nowadays there are authors who
treat all the passages which mention fragrance as if they all referred to the
same concept. This seems to be the assumption of Rivka Nir, according to
whom the concept of the death of Jesus as "earthly incense sacrifice,"
which establishes paradise on earth, supposedly underlies the various N T
texts on aroma. 1
The association between various N T olfactory traditions can scarcely
be justified from the historical perspective. The link Nir makes between
passages such as 2 Cor 2:14-16, Eph 5:2, and the Fourth Gospel, more
specifically John 12:3 and 19:38-40, disregards the fact that in Johns text
there is no reference to sacrifice. Similarly, Nir s assumption that Johns
version of the anointing in Bethany is essentially in line with the Synoptic
accounts of anointing fails to pay sufficient attention to the peculiarities
of the Johannine narrative. Nir s presumption that there was an early
Christian, unified tradition of understanding Jesus' death as "incense sac­
rifice," on which both Paul and later the Gospel writers relied, is rather
questionable. While 2 Cor 2:14-16 and Eph 5:2 may indeed be read
against sacrificial background, we may at most speculate whether Paul
could have depended on some earlier Christian olfactory tradition. Pauls
metaphor in 2 Corinthians is best understood as echoing the image of the
odoriferous Wisdom in Ben Sira, including its cultic setting, but not lim­
ited to it, 2 and Paul's imitator in Ephesians could have been inspired both
by 2 Cor 2:14-16 and Phil 4:18. Yet there is no reason to suppose that
the olfactory images in the Gospels should be interpreted along the
same lines.
In the present contribution I propose to look closer at the specificity of
Johns adaptation of the anointing story, with a particular emphasis on his
heightened attention to sensory elements. I argue that Johns reworking of
the tradition, including his use of more explicit olfactory terminology in
comparison with the Synoptics, is well integrated in his narrative and
consistent with his interest in sense imagery. An earlier tradition with a
focus on the aroma is highly unlikely, and conversely, it is rather implausi­
ble that John, when composing his Gospel, was in any way influenced by
the Pauline metaphors. I begin with the discussion of John 12:3 in its
immediate as well as broader narrative context. Next I consider the rela­
tionship between the Fourth Evangelist s account and the Synoptic stories
of anointing during Jesus' lifetime. Finally, I briefly comment on the
different Gospel accounts of (failed/alleged) anointings after Jesus' death,
in order to show how Johns version is consistent with what I earlier
identified as characteristic elements of the Johannine story of the anoint­
ing in Bethany.
The Fourth Gospel is a particularly "sensual" Gospel. It should not come
as a surprise that the Risen Lord could tell Mary Magdalene not to touch
him, if indeed μη μου απτού in 20:17 refers to touching. 3 Touch, however,
is certainly not as prevalent as the senses of sight and taste. The importance
of sight is illustrated, among others, by Johns proclivity for contrasting
4
the light and darkness and by the significance of the verbs of seeing. As
5
for taste, the motif of eating and drinking is recurrent in Johns Gospel.
Sense of smell may not be as prominent as some other senses, yet olfac­
tory imagery does play a role in the narrative, even if it does not often
come to the fore and if this takes place predominantly in the pericopes
with parallels in the Synoptic accounts. It is in the manner in which the
author of the Fourth Gospel creatively reworks these stories that his pro­
clivity for sense imagery can be seen.
In all the gospel accounts of Jesus' anointing μύρον is mentioned,
implying an olfactory connotation, 6 for in the ancient world a fragrance-
free unguent would be considered an oxymoron. Marks reference to
"genuine nard" (14:3), further reinforces such a connotation, for presum­
ably everyone in the first century would be aware of how strong-scented
nard was. In view of this, Johns explicit comment on the aroma of the
ointment may appear superfluous. Yet this is precisely why we need to
understand it as more than just a piece of factual information, supplied
allegedly by an eye(nose?)-witness. 7 Before we comment on the signifi­
cance of smell, let us first review the setting of the pericope.
John situates his anointing story in Bethany, six days before the
Passover (12:1). Like in the Synoptics, the context is that of a meal, yet in
John 12:1-8 it is a particularly joyful celebration, given that it follows
the raising of Lazarus in chapter 11. We are not told in whose home
the feast takes place, but the presence of the three siblings whom Jesus
loved (cf. 11:5), Martha, Mary and Lazarus, is mentioned. It is meaning­
ful that Jesus' ministry both opens and concludes with a feast. The meal
in Bethany, with its profusion of scent, is reminiscent of the wedding
festivities at Cana, where, following a temporary dearth, wine in abun­
dance was provided by Jesus. Even though in Bethany the sense of pro­
found celebration prevails, it "is not escapist; it does not run away from
8
the reality of life, least of all from death." The narrator, by referring to
Lazarus as being raised from the dead (v. 1), and even more so in Jesus'
response to Judas in w. 7-8, ensures that the sense of the imminent dan­
ger is not forgotten. Lazarus is twice characterized as the one whom Jesus
"raised from the dead," in 12:1, 9. This points to the connection between
the story of the anointing and that of the raising of Lazarus. This link is
strengthened by the proleptic identification of Mary in 11:2 as the woman
who "anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair"
(ή άλείψασα τον κύριον μύρω καί έκμάξασα τους πόδας αύτοΰ ταΐς θριξίν
αυτής). 9 At that point in the narrative the reader would wonder about the
cryptic reference, for until then no such event has taken place.
There are other correspondences between chapters 11 and 12. In 11:32
Mary is reported to have greeted Jesus in a prostrate position (επεσεν
αύτοΰ προς τους πόδας). In 12:3a she takes a pound of unguent of a very
precious genuine 10 nard and anoints his feet (Ή ούν Μαριάμ λαβοΰσα
λίτραν μύρου νάρδου πιστικης πολυτίμου ήλειψεν τους πόδας τοΰ'Ιησοΰ).
She then (v. 3b) wipes his feet with her hair (καί έξέμαξεν ταις θριξίν
αυτής τους πόδας αύτοΰ). The reference to Jesus' feet thus evokes Marys
position in 11:32 even as it anticipates Jesus' washing of the feet of the
disciples and wiping them in chapter 13. Anointing of the feet by some
commentators was judged "unparalleled," 11 but James Coakley lists several
parallels from ancient literature. 12 He hastens to comment that "such few
and diverse passages as these do nothing to suggest that anointing of the
feet was an everyday occurrence in Jesus' day in Palestine
But they
suggest that it could be a natural and spontaneous act of extravagance in
any society that set store by the use of oils and perfumes." 13 Marys gesture
may be viewed as extraordinary not only because she anoints the feet
rather than the head, but also in view of the large quantity and the price
of the unguent (cf. v. 5). No wonder that the aroma of this precious per­
fume would fill the house, as we read in 12:3c (ή δε οικία έπληρώθη εκ
της οσμής του μύρου). Abundance is a recurring topos in the Johannine
narrative, present also, as we shall see in a moment, in another pericope
concerned with aromatic substances, namely in the account of Jesus'
burial. To invoke again the Cana narrative, it is noteworthy that Mary's
deed appears to emulate the point made by Jesus' miraculous change of
water into wine, just as his wiping of the feet of the disciples will soon
repeat her gesture of wiping his feet. With respect to the role of the senses,
it is interesting that as the sense of taste introduces Jesus' ministry, so does
smell set the stage for the transition to another phase. 14 What is more, the
role the senses play in the respective narratives underscores the image of
Jesus who, in spite of the awareness of the impending death, appreciates
the sensory delights characteristic of earthly life, even as taking them to
be signs of another reality.
The fact of filling the house with fragrance by the copious amount of
unguent may not surprise us, but Johns stress on this is by no means self-
evident. Rudolf Bultmann points to the traditional interpretation of the
aroma in John 12:3, linking the image of the spreading of the fragrance
15
with the notion of the Gospel which was soon to fill the entire word.
Yet this reading of John 12:3, rather than by internal considerations, is
more influenced by Mark 14:9 (= Matt 26:13) on the one hand, and
2 Cor 2:14 on the other. In the Fourth Gospel, interestingly enough, the
comment connecting the proclamation of the Good News with the wom­
an's act (cf. Mark 14:9) is missing.
In order to establish the significance of Johns comment in 12:3c we
should rather search for clues in the text itself. The interpretation of
Mary's deed, but not explicitly of the olfactory effects, is included in Jesus'
words in v. 7: αφες αυτήν, ϊνα εις την ήμέραν του ενταφιασμού μου
τήρηση αυτό. The seemingly final clause constitutes a well-known exegeti-
cal conundrum, and none of the solutions suggested thus far are entirely
satisfactory. Mark 14:8 has a more straightforward: "She undertook it to
anoint my body for the entombment" (προέλαβεν μυρίσαι το σώμα μου
εις τον ένταφιασμόν), while the Johannine formulation reads literally:
"leave her, so that she might keep it for the day of my entombment." In
the Byzantine text the problematic phrase was changed into "she has kept"
(τετήρηκεν) to alleviate the difficulty. Raymond Brown proposes to trans­
late the phrase thus: "The purpose was that she might keep it for the day
of my embalming," commenting that the secondary reading probably
provides "the correct interpretation^ Yet in spite of the difficulties
involved in retaining the literal meaning (Mary of Bethany, who features
prominently in chapters 11-12, afterwards disappears from the narrative),
it is possible that Mary did not use the entire ointment on that occasion. 17
It certainly does not contradict John's text, for John, in contrast to Mark,
does not mention the breaking of the jar (cf. Mark 14:3), and even a
smaller amount of nard would have provided ample olfactory effects. The
issue need not detain us, for it is important for us only insofar as it links
Mary's deed with Jesus' death, implying also Mary's foreknowledge, or
18
rather forescent, of the impending events.
The identification of Judas as the one who voices his disapproval of
Mary's gesture, also peculiar to the Fourth Evangelist, further reinforces
the connection with what is about to happen. As regards the aroma of the
unguent, Judas' comment (v. 5) is significant in that Judas is singled out
as the person who fails to appreciate the prophetic dimension of Mary's
act. Judas is thus envisaged as associating death only with the reeking
smell of the decomposing corpse, while his nose remains blind, or rather
anosmic, to the aroma of death which ultimately leads to life. 19 For, how­
ever we interpret Jesus' comment in v. 7, in light of his statement in
11:25-26, the link he makes with his death by referring to the entomb­
ment, ultimately points further, to the resurrection. The scent signifying
death-which-leads-to-resurrection is in this way juxtaposed with the
stench of death, to which Martha referred to in the comment on her
brother's corpse (ήδη όζει) in 11:39. It is interesting that the phrase put
into Martha's mouth constitutes the only explicit reference to an unpleas­
ant smell in the New Testament, 20 yet another indication of the Fourth
Evangelist's awareness of sensory effects. If Mary in chapter 12 is pre­
sented as the only person who, as Francis Moloney puts it, "got it right," 21
challenging thus the popular opinion that Martha's statement in 11:27 is
to be regarded as a "fully Johannine confession," 22 11:39 and 12:3 may
indeed be read as indicating the juxtaposition of the two sisters. Otherwise
we may wonder why John would ascribe to Martha the comment about
Lazarus' stench following what is taken as her confession of faith.
The connection with death and resurrection, albeit the most overt one,
does not exhaust the possible range of meanings evoked by the reference
to the aroma in 12:3c. In the Hebrew Bible the abundance of odours
characterizes the garden, or "paradise" 23 of the Song of Songs. Interest­
ingly, nard, absent in other books of the Hebrew Bible, is mentioned
three times in the Song (1:12; 4:13, 14). Of these three occurrences the
first one is most significant in that it calls attention to the odour (οσμή)
given forth by the woman's nard, simultaneous with the kings reclining.
The references to smell in the Song are exceptional in comparison with
other books of the Hebrew Bible in that they have no sacrificial connota­
tion. The significance ascribed to fragrance is in the Song emphasized by
their association with the lovers' identity, most expressly stated in Song
1:3. Even though in the poem no actual anointing is described, in 1:3 the
male lover's name is envisaged as ointment poured out. Furthermore, in
the LXX, besides Jer 25:10, only in Song 1:3-4 do we have the explicit
reference to the "scent of the ointment," albeit in the plural (οσμή μύρων).
With regard to the setting, as André Feuillet comments, "dans le Canti-
que le parfum est destiné à un roi qui, étendu sur un divan..., prend part
à un festin ; même situation dans Jo. 12,3 (avec le participe άνακειμένων
qui rappelle άνάκλισις du Cantique) : Jésus prend part à un festin, et c'est
comme Roi qu'il est gratifié à ce-moment là d'une onction, car celle-ci ne
fait que préluder à la sépulture véritablement royale de 19, 39." 24
The interpretation of the Johannine scene in light of the Song of Songs,
popular in patristic literature, is now only occasionally brought forward
by exegetes. Yet Feuillet is not the only author to have argued that there
are a number of elements common to John 12:3 and Song 1:12, especially
in the LXX translation. 25 From our perspective it is most interesting that
in both cases there is an explicit comment on the aroma given forth by
nard.
In the Song of Songs, the aromas, even as they identify the two lovers,
create an additional bond between them. Such an olfactory connection
may ultimately result in the admixture of aromas, wherein it may no lon­
ger be feasible to distinguish between the individual odours. From this
perspective it may be noted that Marys extravagant gesture in John 12:3
is not devoid of sexual undertones, yet the intimate bond between Mary
and Jesus is expressed in the union of their scents. 26 By wiping Jesus' feet
with her hair, she mixes her odour with that of Jesus, and in this way all
the three scents: that of nard, of Marys hair, and of Jesus' feet, create yet
another, new fragrance.
Given the reference to the king in Song 1:12, in addition to reinforc­
ing John's interest in Jesus' kingship, 27 an allusion to this text in John 12:3
could support the messianic interpretation of the passage. It would sug­
gest that Mary, like her sister in 11:27, also recognized Jesus as the
Messiah, 28 or even, if Moloney's interpretation of Marthas behaviour in
\\\2§-TJ is correct, that Marys act surpasses her sisters words in 11:27.
By anticipating Jesus' proximate death with her multivalent gesture, Mary
acknowledges that his messianic dignity may entail a different scenario
than what may have been envisaged in traditional messianic expectations.
In the ancient world there was a clear relationship between one s social
30
status and scent, hence between power and scent. Even if one rejects the
royal/messianic connotation therefore, Marys act can still be interpreted
as ascribing a special position to Jesus. Her reverence is thus expressed not
only in the anointing of Jesus' feet, as is usually asserted, but perhaps even
more so in imparting to him the remarkable fragrance.
As J.K. Elliott observes, the fact that the story of Jesus' anointing is
enshrined in all the Gospels, puts it "on the same level as the miraculous
feedings or the crucifixion." 31 This attests the importance of the tradition,
which is often considered as an attempt by Jesus' followers to make up for
the "historical deficiency of any anointing rite at Jesus' burial and Jesus'
foreknowledge of his passion and death." 32 Yet while all the four accounts
may go back to the same tradition, they also differ in a number of details.
In Mark 14:3-9 and Matt 26:6-13 we come across strikingly similar
33
accounts of anointing. More detailed comparisons are readily available,
so I only note the main points. Matthews version is generally regarded as
34
a rewriting of the Markan one, as it differs from it mostly in details,
owing in large part to Matthew s shortening of Mark s text. This includes
the omission of certain elements, such as the identification of the perfume
as nard, its exact price as well as the reference to the breaking of the jar.
The less concrete information we receive about the episode, the less vivid
it becomes, and the failure to mention nard weakens the olfactory over­
tones of the pericope. Yet albeit weakened, the reference to ointment,
μύρον, ensures that such a connotation is not completely lost. On the
other hand, Matthew spells out that those who complained were Jesus'
disciples (cf. 26:8), rather than some unspecified τίνες (Mark 14:4). In
spite of those differences, Mark and Matthew agree in the essentials: in
Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, during a meal, an unnamed
woman is reported to have poured expensive ointment on Jesus' head.
Some of those present object, but Jesus defends the woman, referring to
his burial and "opposing the ongoing presence of the poor to the immi­
nent absence of Jesus himself." 35
Johns story differs from Mark and Matthew in several respects. The
most important differences pertain to (1) his identification of the anony­
mous woman as Mary of Bethany, (2) the part of Jesus' body which was
anointed (feet not head), as well as the fact that he mentions (3) the wip­
ing of the feet with the hair, and (4) the subsequent filling of the house
with fragrance. In the discussion which ensues (5) the one to protest is
identified by John as Judas. Finally, (6) the comment mentioning the last­
ing memory of the woman in the future preaching of the Gospel (Mark
14:9) is missing in John. 3 6 There are, nonetheless, a number of verbal
parallels between John and the two other Evangelists, especially Mark.
Most interesting is the reference to the genuine nard (cf. μύρου νάρδου
πιστικης in Mark 14:3 and John 12:3), especially in view of the infre-
quency of the adjective πιστικός.
The relationship between the Lukan story of a "sinful" woman anoint­
ing Jesus feet and the other Gospel stories is even more complex. In Luke
7:38 a woman who is referred to as a "sinner" (cf. αμαρτωλός in v. 37)
washes Jesus' feet with her tears and wipes them with her hair. She then
anoints them with the ointment (ήλειφεν τω μύρφ) she had brought in an
alabaster jar. The episode is placed at the beginning of a more elaborate
scene (Luke 7:36-50) in the house of a certain Simon, but a "Pharisee,"
not a "leper" like in the other Synoptics. The Pharisee does not voice
his protest aloud, but Jesus nonetheless becomes aware of it. The whole
story provides for Luke an occasion to make a point about repentance
and forgiveness.
The fact that the interpretation suggested by Luke, linking the incident
with forgiveness of the sins as a consequence of the woman's love and
faith (cf. w. 47 and 50), is at odds with what we find in the other Gos­
pels, have led a number of authors to distinguish between two different
episodes. 38 Since Luke has even less interest in olfactory effects than Mark
(Luke does not mention nard), 39 it is not of ultimate importance for us
whether he could have been inspired by a different story. Regardless of
whether some other tradition is not likewise reflected in the Lukan
narrative, his dependence on Mark in the way he sketches the setting (pri­
vate house, a meal, a woman with an alabaster jar entering to anoint Jesus,
praise of the woman by Jesus following the critical reaction of someone
present) does make it quite likely that Lukes account is dependent on
Mark. 4 0
More importantly, it is plausible that some of the elements in which
John differs essentially from Mark, such as the anointing of the feet rather
than the head and the wiping of Jesus' feet with the woman's hair, are
taken from Luke. 41 They are, however, integrated in his theological
scheme, as argued above. Thus the anointing of Jesus' feet, even if in both
stories it implies humility, not only is used by John to elaborate a "parallel
to his narrative of the washing of the disciples' feet," 42 but it is just as
meaningful for the image of Mary as John presents it throughout
chapters 11-12. 43 Also the wiping of the feet after the anointing is not as
pointless as is sometimes assumed. Besides the practical consideration,
noted by the commentators, that the vast quantity of unguent could not
have been all rubbed in Jesus' feet, 44 the closeness with Jesus and the
transmission of scents which ensues are yet another consequence of John's
inversion of the Lukan order. Furthermore, there is no reminiscence in
Johns version of what is most conspicuous in Luke's narrative, namely the
woman's past "sinful" life, and there is no reason to suppose that John
intended any such connotation.
Sabbe s careful discussion makes a good case for Johns dependence on
the Synoptics. He was of course not the only author to have considered
the issue, as the episode offers a delightful playground for all those
involved in the debate concerning Johns possible dependence on the
Synoptics. The problems that the account raises are succinctly summa-
rized by Rudolf Schnackenburg: "Wie ist das Verhältnis zur markinischen
und matthäischen Erzählung? Welche Beziehungen bestehen zur lukani-
schen Geschichte von der salbenden Sünderin, die trotz erheblicher
Abweichungen einige gemeinsame Züge mit dem joh. Bericht aufweist?
Was hat der vierte Evangelist von sich aus hinzugetan oder weggelassen?" 45
A variety of responses have been offered to explain the similarities and dif-
ferences between the Johannine and the Synoptic accounts, reflecting in
general the scholarly positions concerning Johns relationship to the Syn-
optics. Besides the assertion that John relied on the Synoptic accounts,
supported by the adherents of the "Leuven hypothesis," it has been sug-
gested that John was drawing on oral tradition, 46 or that he used some
other written sources. 47 Some authors prefer not to take their position in
the debate. 48
The proposals of those who put forward alternative sources of John s
account, at least with respect to John 12:1-8, are not particularly compel-
ling. Curiously, even though everyone agrees that the anointing accounts
are of extreme importance for determining the relationship between John
and the Synoptics, the discussion in some of the contributions aimed at
demonstrating John s independence of the other Gospels gives the impres-
sion that the preconceived result guides them more than common sense.
While they play down obvious similarities, they tend to exaggerate
even minor differences. 49 For example, Craig Keener asserts that Johns
failure to mention the alabaster jar reinforces the picture that John is
independent of the Synoptics. 50 Why would John necessarily need to
retain a detail apparently judged irrelevant for his purposes is unclear to
me, and much less plausible than its omission. Similarly, the argument of
Rudolf Bultmann that Johns identification of the anointing woman as
Mary rather than Martha proves that John was dependent on a source
other than Mark and Matthew is not persuasive, 51 especially in view of
Marys portrayal as the one consistently at Jesus' feet. The assumption of
exegetes that Johns logic must have followed what they consider logical
reasoning, is quite astounding. The presumption that John must have
slavishly copied his sources is likewise evident in Schnackenburg s reason-
ing. In evaluating what he finds to be the special Johannine features, he
denies any creativity to John: "Wenn die wörtlichen Anklänge an Mk an
eine literarische Kenntnis dieses Εν durch Joh denken lassen, sind es jene
joh. Sonderzüge, die in eine andere Richtung weisen." 52 As a consequence,
he posits Johns dependence on an independent source, asserting that "Die
in der Quelle vorgefundene Perikope paßte so gut zu seinen theologischen
Absichten, daß er sie im wesentlichen einfach übernehmen konnte." 53
It is not my intention to determine here the complex issue of Johns
sources. It is evident, however, that regardless of whether the "Leuven
hypothesis" is valid for all of the Fourth Gospel, it is certainly plausible in
the case of John 12:1-8. The issue of historical accuracy is beyond the
scope of this essay. 54
To return to the saying on fragrance in 12:3c, as already noted by
Sabbe, it is "a perfect Johannine redaction. It stresses the quality of the
55
ointment complementing its abundance of 12,3a." In spite of the appar­
ent concession Sabbe makes with regard to the symbolic significance of
56
the narrators comment concerning the fragrance filling the house, he
then rather vigorously plays down any such symbolism, allowing at most
57
that "ointment... refers to incorruptibility." And yet a glimpse at the
role of olfaction in ancient Jewish literature as well as in the Greco-
Roman world 58 should suffice to make one realize that Sabbe largely
underestimates the importance attached to smells and olfactory experi­
ences in the ancient world. 59
In our discussion of the significance of fragrance in v. 12c above we
already indicated how the phrase fits Johns overall scheme. The emphasis
on smell is not only in keeping with Johns interest in sense images, but
what is more, it is a not-so-subtle allusion to Marthas comment on
Lazarus' stench in 11:39. The inhabitants of the first-century Greco-
Roman world need not be reminded that nard was a strong-smelling aro­
matic, so the seemingly redundant comment could be inspired by the
explicit association made between nard and smell in Song 1:12. The
remark in John 12:3c can be read in light of Jesus' death and resurrection,
but also, quite possibly as an allusion to his kingship or at least his ele­
vated position. Finally, rubbing the oil in Jesus' feet, and then in Mary's
hair, would surely cause its fragrance to waft throughout the room, and
possibly even the entire house. There is therefore no need whatsoever to
presume that John must have found the comment about the aroma in the
hypothetical source, as Schnackenburg does. 60 Nor, for that matter, does
this entail that the pericope is based on an eye-witness' account, as John
61
Robinson suggests.
In short, the major differences between John and Mark can be explained
either on the grounds of the redactional features characteristic for him, or
as due to his reliance on Luke. The objections voiced by its critics, on the
other hand, are not substantial enough. Rather than assume the existence
of hypothetical sources for John 12:1-8, it is more plausible to presuppose
that Johns sources were the Synoptic Gospels. The saying on fragrance in
12:3c can with no special difficulty be attributed to John, and it is per­
fectly integrated in his overall agenda, there is thus no rationale to look
for it in some earlier source.
Before I conclude, I would like to comment briefly on some elements of
the burial narratives in the different Gospels, for in this context Johns
interest in olfaction once more comes to the fore.
As mentioned above, the stories of Jesus' anointing before his death are
often interpreted by exegetes as an attempt to make up for the deficiency
of any such rite after his death. Indeed, at least in the Synoptic Gospels
the only references to anointing following the crucifixion are to unsuc­
cessful attempts to anoint Jesus' body. In Mark 15:46 Joseph wraps the
body in a linen cloth, and when the Sabbath is over, three women are
reported to have bought aromatic spices (αρώματα) in order to anoint
(ϊνα άλείψωσιν) Jesus (16:1). Yet when they arrive at the tomb, the body
is no longer there. Also in Luke 23:53 Joseph wraps Jesus' body in a linen
cloth and lays it in a tomb. This time the women prepare aromatics and
ointments (αρώματα καί μύρα; 23:56) beforehand, yet they do not apply
them immediately. They come to the tomb only on the first day of the
week, carrying the spices that they had prepared (φέρουσαι α ήτοίμασαν
αρώματα; 24:1). Like in Mark, when they arrive at the tomb, Jesus' body
is no longer there. In spite of the difference with regard to the preparation
of the spices, the narrative can be plausibly explained as "resting on Mark's
account." 62 Matthew appears to ignore the issue altogether. In 27:59
Joseph wraps Jesus' body in a "clean linen cloth," but on the Easter morn­
63
ing the Evangelist "has the women visit the tomb... merely as sightseers"
(cf. 28:1).
It is sometimes asserted that in the Gospel of John, by contrast, the
anointing does take place after the death of Jesus. In fact in 19:39-40 we
only read that Nicodemus brings "a mixture of myrrh and aloes of about
a hundred pounds " (μίγμα σμύρνης καί αλόης ως λίτρας εκατόν), and
that subsequently he and Josephus wrap the body "in cloth wrappings 64
with the spices" (όθονίοις μετά των αρωμάτων). The view of Raymond
Brown, who translates αρώματα as "aromatic oils," on the grounds that "it
was customary for the Jews to use oil," 65 is not persuasive. In the LXX
άρωμα is customarily used in reference to spices, and as a rule it renders
the Hebrew term ΟΉψΙ. The fact that it sometimes appears in the lists
where oil is also mentioned (cf. 4 Kgs 20:13; 1 Chr 9:29), makes it clear
that it should be distinguished from it. In the account of Asa's burial the
king's body is laid on a bier filled with spices, and it is interesting that the
Hebrew D^tt 0">ρψ5 (literally "spices and all kinds/sorts") was rendered as
αρωμάτων καί γένη μύρων. This supplies the somewhat elliptical Hebrew
text, but at the same time again shows that αρώματα were not to be con­
fused with ointments. The only place in the LXX where the term could
refer to aromatic oils in Est 2:12, but even there this is not clear. Also in
Flavius Josephus αρώματα regularly refer to spices. In Mark 16:1 women
are reported to have brought their aromatic spices "in order to anoint"
Jesus' body, which could mean that their αρώματα were in a liquid form.
Yet the fact that Luke in 23:56 has αρώματα και μύρα may suggest his
attempt to correct Mark's imprecision. As a result, it is most reasonable to
take αρώματα in John 19:40 as referring to aloes and myrrh, mentioned
in v. 39, which were probably in crushed or powdered form. 66
Myrrh and aloes are mentioned together also in Ps 45:9 and Song 4:14,
and apparently also in Pr 7:17, although it is not certain if in all these
texts the same plant is meant, nor that John has the same plant in mind.
The term αλόη is in any case a hapax legomenon in the N T and it is absent
from the LXX (in Song 4:14 άλωθ renders the Hebrew term). The kinds
of spices named in John 19:39 were surely known for their fragrance, and
it is notable that John takes care to identify them, rendering the imagery
more vivid than Marks and Lukes general references. Even more impor­
tantly, however, he again calls attention to the extraordinary quantity
(more than thirty kilograms!). As Mary honoured Jesus' body in his life­
time with the abundance of nard oil, now tribute is paid to it after Jesus'
death, 67 again in olfactory terms, even though this time John does not
make any additional comments about the aroma ensuing from the copi­
ous amount of spices.
All the four Gospels include the story of the anointing of Jesus by a
woman, yet only in the Gospel of John do we come across an explicit
remark on the aroma of the anointing oil filling the house. The comment
on the fragrance of Mary's perfume in 12:3c, rather than being an indica­
tion of John's dependence on sources other than the Synoptic Gospels, is
much more likely due to the Johannine redaction. It may bespeak the
author's particular sensitivity and awareness of the symbolic meanings of
fragrance, including the association between social order and smell, possi­
bly implying also an intertextual allusion to the Song of Songs. It is in
line with the author's interest in sense imagery elsewhere in the Gospel
and is well integrated in his narrative and theological scheme. Among
others, it contributes to the positive portrayal of Mary of Bethany, and
her special relationship with Jesus. Olfaction in chapter 12, like gustatory
imagery in chapter 2, serves as a boundary marker, introducing the
transition to the last stage of Jesus' earthly life, his death, and ultimately,
the resurrection.
The contrast between the Fourth Evangelist and the Synoptics is evi-
dent not only in the accounts of anointing, but also in the burial narra-
tives. Even though John does not comment on the aroma, the vast
amount of spices he mentions, including their specification, is again in
contrast with the failed attempts to anoint Jesus in Mark and Luke, where
only a general reference to spices (and ointments in Luke) appears.
