Five times in the undisputed letters Paul invokes God as guarantor of the
truth of a claim with a form of the phrase θεός μάρτυς, "God is witness"
(Rom 1:9; 2 Cor 1:23; Phil 1:8; 1 Thess 2:5, 10). 2 These sayings present a
problem for interpretation in that their exact rhetorical force is not immedi­
ately clear; there is more than one way in which God might be understood
to function as a witness in these contexts. A few interpreters of Paul have
noticed this point of ambiguity, but no one has yet given close attention to
the Greek rhetorical tradition of divine testimony as a plausible context for
these Pauline sayings. 3 This bibliographical anomaly provides the occasion
for this article.
Methodologically, I follow that school of thought that Margaret Mitch-
ell has called historical rhetorical criticism, which is to be distinguished
from the New Rhetoric and other synchronic forms of analysis. 4 In a vari-
ation on Mitchell s approach, I follow Stanley Stowers in applying histori-
cal rhetorical criticism not only to whole literary units but also to smaller
forms. 5 My thesis is that the Pauline phrase "God is witness" is not a self-
imprecatory oath at all, but rather a figure of speech with roots in the
rhetoric of classical Greece and a long tradition in postclassical pagan,
Jewish, and Christian literature. 6 In this figure of speech, God is not testi-
fying against Paul in case Paul should default on a promise; rather God is
testifying for Paul that Pauls character can be trusted.
Commentators have long identified the Pauline "God is witness" sayings
as self-imprecatory oaths after a pattern attested in the Hebrew Bible. For
example, Ernst Käsemann comments on Rom 1:9 ("God is my witness...
that unceasingly I remember you always in my prayers") that its literary
form is an "oath, which occurs in 1 Sam 12:6 LXX and which is a com-
mon formula in Paul." 7 C.K. Barrett comments on the same verse that it
represents "an Old Testament form of asseveration." 8 Likewise, Gordon
Fee writes about Phil 1:8 ("God is my witness that I long for you all in
the affection of Christ Jesus") that it is a "mild oath" whose form "proba-
bly derives from the O T practice of calling on God as witness between
two parties." 9 Examples might be multiplied, but these are sufficient to
illustrate a pattern of interpretation. 10 According to this pattern of inter-
pretation, when Paul says, "God is my witness," what he means is, "May
God testify against me if what I am saying is false."
There is certainly precedent for such an idiom in the Hebrew Bible. 11
Distributed across the Torah, Prophets, and Writings are a number of
instances in which people appeal to God as a witness between or against
parties in the striking of promissory agreements. So in Gen 31:50, Laban
makes a pact with Jacob saying, "If you abuse my daughters, or if you
take wives in addition to my daughters, although no one is with us, see,
God is witness between me and you (ΤΓ21 Τ Ι " φ DVÒN)." 12 The sense of
the statement "TJJ DTÒK, "God is witness," is determined by the condi-
tional clause npn ONI... Πίρη DK, "If you abuse... and if you take"; that is,
God will testify against Jacob in case Jacob should violate the agreement.
Likewise in Jeremiah 42, in the wake of the Babylonian conquest of
Judah, the remnant of the people ask Jeremiah what they should do,
promising to abide by whatever word God sends: JTIQK ΐφ M2, îTlîT TP
rwyi ρ \xbtn ττοκ mrr -[row nuw i n n
VM *Ò DK JDNJI, "May
YHWH be a true and faithful witness against us if we do not act according
to all the word with which YHWH your God sends you to us" (Jer 42:5).
The Greek translator renders the expression very closely: έστω κύριος έν
ήμίν εις μάρτυρα δίκαιον και πιστόν, ει μη κατά πάντα τον λόγον δν αν
άποστείλη σε κύριος προς ήμας οΰτως ποιήσομεν (Jer 49:5 LXX). Here,
as in the oath between Laban and Jacob, God is invoked as witness against
a party in case that party should fail to carry out a promised future course
of action (MT TWyi *Ò ON; LXX ει μη ποιήσομεν; "if we do not do"). 1 3
In 1 Sam 20:12 the same idiom is implied, albeit without the word "TJ?,
"witness." There Jonathan promises David that he will inquire after his
father Sauls attitude toward David, saying, ΠΚ npTIK Ό btnVP TÒK Π1ΓΡ
*1N, literally "YHWH the God of Israel, that I will sound out my father."
The Greek translator supplies the verb οίδεν, so: κύριος ό θεός Ισραήλ
οίδεν δτι ανακρίνω τον πατέρα μου, "The Lord God of Israel knows that I
will sound out my father" (1 Kgdms 20:12). 14 In favor of reading this as
an ellipsis for our oath formula is the following verse, where Jonathan
adds a self-imprecation: *ptP ¡"Dl jnJlïTO ΠΙΓΡ TWJT PD, "May YHWH do
the same to Jonathan, and even more," in case Jonathan should fail to
alert David to danger from Sauls hand. 1 5 Here, as in the instances cited
above, God is named as witness to future acts to be undertaken in fulfill­
ment of a promise. The form of the sayings is conditional: "if you mistreat
my daughters," "if we do not do as you say," "if I do not inform you." If
these circumstances should obtain, if one party should default on her
promise, then God will be witness against that party that she is guilty.
In an extension of this idiom, there are a few places at which God is
named as witness against a party not in case of future wrongdoing but
rather for past wrongdoing. For example, Jeremiahs letter to Babylon in
Jer 29:1-23 includes a condemnation of two false prophets, about whose
many crimes the oracle says, ΠΙΓΡ DRÎ "Tpl JTPIH Ό3Ν1, "I am the one who
knows, and I am witness, says YHWH" (Jer 29:23). Either due to a tex­
tual minus or a condensed translation, Jer 36:23 LXX lacks an equiva­
lency for JTPin, reading simply εγώ μάρτυς φησιν κύριος, "I am witness,
says the Lord." The force of the idiom, however, is unaffected by this dif­
ference. God is a witness against these wrongdoers by virtue of his having
knowledge of their crimes. This is also the sense of the prophetic oracles
at Mie 1:2 ("Hear, all you peoples, listen, O earth and all that is in it, let
the Lord YHWH be a witness against you [iyb DD1 ΠΙΓΡ TTN VPI; LXX
εσται κύριος έν ύμιν εις μαρτύριον]") and Mal 3:5 ("I will draw near to
you for judgment, I will be a swift witness [ΊΠΏΟ Ί]) ΤΡΠΙ; LXX εσομαι
μάρτυς ταχύς] against the sorcerers, against the adulterers," etc.). With Jer
29:23, these passages attest a form of the idiom used in oracles of judg­
ment wherein God is spoken of as both judge and witness, both the exec­
utor of the sentence and the one who confirms the guilt of the guilty.
There are two possible exceptions to this otherwise consistent pattern.
At 1 Sam 12:5, in Samuels speech ceding authority to the newly coro­
nated Saul, Samuel insists that he has been upright in all his dealings with
the nation. He says, HD1KD T I On*TCQ to Ό ΠΤΠ ΟΤΠ ΙΓΠΡΟ Tjn DM mm Tp,
"YHWH is witness against you, and his anointed is witness this day, that
you have not found anything in my hand." The Greek translator renders
closely: μάρτυς κύριος εν ύμιν και μάρτυς χριστός αύτοΰ σήμερον εν
ταύτη τη ήμερα δτι ούχ εύρήκατε έν χειρί μου ούθέν (1 Kgdms 12:5).
Here God is called upon to vindicate Samuel, not to condemn him. For­
mally, however, even here God is a witness against a party: "YHWH is
witness against you (032; but cf. LXX εν ύμιν)." That is, Samuels vindica­
tion consists in Gods condemning the Israelites if they should try to
falsely accuse him. The only genuine exception, then, is Job 16:19, where
Job protests his innocence to his friends, saying that God will vouch for
his upright manner of ife: ΟΌΠΟΙ HHUn HJJ DOtPl mn ΠΠΡ OJt, "Even
now, behold, my witness is in heaven; my advocate is on high." Likewise
in Greek: και νυν ιδού έν ούρανοις ό μάρτυς μου, ό δε συνίστωρ μου έν
ύψίστοις (Job 16:19 LXX). Here God is a witness for Job, not against
him. 16 Everywhere else, though, God is a witness between parties by being
a witness against either party in case it should violate the agreement. 17
Not surprisingly, this figure of speech endures after the biblical period,
as well. So in the Testament of Levi (ca. second century B.C.E.), the dying
patriarch charges his sons to live according to the law of the Lord. Upon
their promise to do so, Levi names a series of witnesses to the vow: μάρτυς
κύριος, και μάρτυρες οι άγγελοι αύτοΰ, και μάρτυς έγώ, και μάρτυρες
ύμεις περί του λόγου του στόματος υμών, "The Lord is witness, and his
angels are witnesses, and I am witness, and you are witnesses concerning
the word of your mouth" (T. Levi 19:3). 18 In keeping with the biblical
pattern, the point of these witnesses is that they can testify against the
oath-takers in case they fail to make good on their promise. It is clear that
the Israelite self-imprecatory oath has a rich biblical and post-biblical his­
tory. The question is whether, in our five passages, Paul participates in this
history. 19
In the epistolary opening of the Letter to the Romans, following the
greeting, Paul begins with thanksgiving for the renowned faith of the
20
believers in Rome. It is in the context of this thanksgiving that he assures
his hearers of their place in his prayers: μάρτυς γαρ μου έστιν ό θεός... ώς
αδιαλείπτως μνείαν υμών ποιούμαι, "God is my witness... that unceas­
ingly I remember you always in my prayers" (Rom 1:9). Paul names God
as his μάρτυς, in this case with the simple copulative έστιν; formally, this
is a statement of fact, not an appeal. Also, μάρτυς is modified by the first
person possessive pronoun; God is Pauls witness. The thing to which God
is witness is Pauls constant remembrance of the Romans in prayer. This
relation is expressed with ώς plus an independent clause, where ώς func­
tions essentially like δτι, introducing the fact, not (as the English "how"
might suggest) the degree of the sentiment expressed. 21 In short, Paul
expresses his desire to visit his hearers by informing them of the content
of his prayers, concerning which God, who alone hears them, is the only
qualified witness.
The "God is witness" saying in Phil 1:8 is very much like that in Rom
1:9. It, too, falls in the thanksgiving section of the epistolary opening and
functions to verify the apostles goodwill toward his hearers. Paul has great
confidence in Gods work among the Philippian believers (1:6), who are
his co-participants in grace and whom he holds in his heart (1:7). In fact,
Paul writes, μάρτυς γάρ μου ό θεός ώς έπιποθώ πάντας ύμας έν σπλάγχνοις
Χρίστου Ίησοΰ, "God is my witness that I long for you all in the affection
of Christ Jesus" (1:8). Here, as in Rom 1:9, God is named as Pauls wit­
ness using the copulative and the possessive pronoun. Here, too, the thing
attested is introduced by ώς expressing "that-ness." In Phil 1:8, though,
the thing attested is not the content of a prayer but rather a particular
emotion; God can testify that Paul feels profound affection for the believ­
ers in Philippi. Pauls emotions, like Pauls prayers, are things that God is
in a unique position to know; therefore God is the appropriate witness to
the claim.
First Thessalonians 2 contains a pair of "God is witness" sayings in
close proximity. Following the epistolary introduction of 1:1-10, 1 Thess
2:1-12 comprises an extended defense of the uprightness of Pauls minis­
try in Thessalonica. 22 He comments in some detail on the various virtues
that he practiced and vices that he shunned while he was among the Thes­
salonians. For example, Paul says, so far from any error, uncleanness, or
guile (2:3), he behaved like a nurse tending to her children (2:7). It is in
this context that Paul makes a twofold denial in 2:5: Οΰτε γαρ ποτέ έν
λόγφ κολακείας έγενήθημεν, καθώς οϊδατε, "We did not ever come in a
word of flattery, as you know"; οΰτε έν προφάσει πλεονεξίας, θεός μάρτυς,
"nor [did we come] in a pretext of greed, God is witness." Here καθώς
οϊδατε, "as you know," and θεός μάρτυς, "God is witness," are parallel
expressions. The Thessalonians can attest that Paul did not speak flatter­
ingly, and God can attest that he harbored no secret hope of getting rich;
the former because they heard Pauls words, and the latter because he
knows Pauls motives.
Again in 1 Thess 2:10 Paul writes more generally, ύμείς μάρτυρες και ό
θεός, ώς όσίως και δικαίως και άμέμπτως ύμιν τοις πιστεύουσιν έγενήθημεν,
"You and God are witnesses that we came to you believers in holiness and
righteousness and blamelessness." Here God and the Thessalonians are
co-witnesses to the same thing, namely the total uprightness of Pauls pat­
tern of life among them. In 2:5 the designation of God as witness is syn­
tactically independent, while in 2:10 we find the familiar ώς plus
independent clause expressing the thing attested. In neither case does Paul
use the first person possessive pronoun, as he does in Rom 1:9 and Phil
1:8, and in both cases God is a co-witness along with the addressees
themselves.
It is fitting to discuss 2 Cor 1:23 last of all because of its formal differ­
ences from the other four sayings. Like them, it falls near the beginning
of the letter, although (as in 1 Thessalonians) not technically in the epis­
tolary introduction. On the heels of the introduction proper (1:1-11),
Paul turns to explain his decision not to visit Corinth as he had originally
planned. "I wanted to come to you first" (1:15), he assures the Corinthi­
ans, but the course of events has belied this intention, and the apostle s
delinquency has apparently raised questions about his character. Is he
guilty of έλαφρία, "vacillation," in his dealings with the Corinthians
(1:17)? No, Paul insists, there was an honorable reason for his delay:
φειδόμενος υμών ούκέτι ήλθον εις Κόρινθον, "in order to spare you I did
not yet come to Corinth" (1:23). But it is not just the apostles word
against the Corinthians' suspicions in this matter. Paul prefaces his expla­
nation with an invocation of a divine witness: Έγώ δε μάρτυρα τον θεον
επικαλούμαι επί την έμήν ψυχήν, "I call upon God as witness upon my
life that" concern for the Corinthians was the reason for the delay.
Despite the familiar "God is witness" motif, 2 Cor 1:23 differs from
our other passages in several important respects. Only here does Paul for­
mally invoke (επικαλούμαι) God as μάρτυς, rather than simply identify­
ing him as such. 23 Only here is the thing witnesses to introduced by δτι
rather than ώς. 24 As in 1 Thess 2:5, the thing attested is an intention or
motive, something that the addressees had no way of knowing but that
God did. Last of all, only in 2 Cor 1:23 is there a participial phrase quali­
fying μάρτυς, namely έπί την έμήν ψυχήν, literally "upon my life." The
translation of the preposition is a problem that bears heavily on the ques­
tion of the meaning of the saying as a whole. Both the RSV and the
NRSV, reading the verse as a self-imprecatory oath, translate έπί as
"against." 25 The commentaries tend to agree. Frank Matera translates, "I
call upon God as my witness—staking my life on this," and explains,
"The sense is that if Paul is speaking falsely, then let God take his life." 26
Likewise Jan Lambrecht comments, "The clause means that he is willing
to give his life in case he is not telling the truth." 27
The formal differences from our other four passages are significant. The
explicit invocation and, even more so, the self-referential participial phrase
have been reason for many interpreters to read this verse as a variation on
the Israelite self-imprecatory oath. But even these features are not deci­
sive. The invocation επικαλούμαι is not determinative, since it is attested
in "God is witness" sayings that are not self-imprecatory oaths. 28 As for
the participial phrase έπί την έμήν ψυχήν, "upon my life," it might mean
"against my life" in the sense of "with my life at stake"; but it might
equally well mean "concerning my life" in the sense of "concerning my
way of life." 29 If the latter, it would be entirely in keeping with the pattern
we have observed elsewhere, in which the apostle calls God to testify, as
only God can, that his moral character in relation to the churches is above
reproach. 30
In light of these features of the Pauline "God is witness" sayings, while
the oath interpretation has remained the dominant one, some interpreters
have noticed that the category is not a perfect fit. Joseph Fitzmyer, in a
note on Rom 1:9, writes, "His formulation echoes OT usage
[but] in
31
this case Paul is not using a conventional formula." Likewise Earl Rich­
ard, commenting on 1 Thess 2:5, can find no biblical precedent for the
Pauline formula. "Paul, in a Hellenistic manner, calls on God as the only
witness to the missionaries' interior motives." 32 But those who have
noticed that the Pauline sayings do not fit the biblical pattern have not
pursued the question further to identify a more fitting linguistic context
for them. When such an inquiry is undertaken, however, it turns out that
a fitting linguistic context presents itself.
As is well known, the testimony of witnesses (μάρτυρες) was a prominent
feature of the Athenian legal system in which the forms of argument that
33
would become hallmarks of Greco-Roman rhetoric were first developed.
The function of the μάρτυς was to stand and speak in verification of a
claim made by the speaker who summoned him. So in the speeches the
calling of the witness is often prefixed by οτι ταΰτ' αληθή λέγω, "To prove
that I am telling the truth," or the like. One example from a forensic con­
text is Lysias 1.29, where the defendant Euphiletus claims that the man
he killed, Eratosthenes, had admitted his guilt in the presence of Euphile­
tus and his neighbors. In support of this claim, Euphiletus summons
some of those who heard the confession: καί μοι άνάβητε τούτων
μάρτυρες, "Will my witnesses to these things come forward" (29). 34 The
words of the witnesses are not preserved in the text of Lysias; it is the fact
of their testimony, the content of which is understood to be identical with
the speakers claim, that matters.
The summoning of witnesses is a standard feature not only of forensic
but also of deliberative rhetoric. So, for example, in Demosthenes' On the
Crown, Demosthenes levels a charge of treason at his opponent Aeschines,
claiming that he was caught meeting with the Macedonian spy Anaxinus.
Not content to let such a charge stand on its own, Demosthenes says, και
οτι ταΰτ' αληθή λέγω, κάλει μοι τούτων τους μάρτυρας, "To prove that I
am telling the truth, please call my witnesses of these things" {De Cor.
137). 35 Here, as in Lysias, the words of the witnesses are not preserved; the
point is that they said what Demosthenes had said, thereby verifying it.
As this last example shows, witnesses can be and often are employed in
settings in which the quality of a persons character is under consideration.
Such cases are especially relevant for our purposes, since this is precisely
the issue in all five Pauline "God is witness" sayings. A good example is
Demosthenes, De Cor. 267-268, where Demosthenes demonstrates the
uprightness of his public life by recounting his many liturgies on behalf
of the city. These he substantiates not by summoning live witnesses
(μάρτυρες) but by having the clerk read written testimonies (μαρτυρίαι).
After the μαρτυρίαι, the text of which has not come down to us, are read
aloud, Demosthenes concludes plainly, Έν μεν τοίνυν τοις προς την πόλιν
τοιούτος, "Such is my character in matters pertaining to the city" {De Cor.
268). That is, the testimonies to his particular public services bear out his
claim to be a beneficent person.
Greek μάρτυρες included not only live human beings and their written
statements; the gods were thought to be as qualified, or more so, to give
official testimony as people were. 36 The testimony of the gods often came
in the form of oracles (μαντείαι or χρησμοί). So, for example, in Aeschines'
Against Ctesiphon, the speech to which Demosthenes' On the Crown is a
response, Aeschines relates a version of Demosthenes' career that amounts
to a litany of offenses against the people of Athens and the gods. In one
place, Aeschines charges that Demosthenes sinned against Apollo by
accepting a bribe from the people of Amphissa, who were illegally farm­
ing the plain of Cirra, a place that the Pythia at Delphi had said should
lie fallow as consecrated ground. In support of this charge, Aeschines asks
that the actual text of the oracle in question be read aloud in the
assembly: 37 'Ότι δ' άληθη λέγω, άνάγνωθι την του θεοΰ μαντείαν, "Το
prove that I am telling the truth, please read the oracle of the god" {In
Ctes. 112). 38 That is, Aeschines invokes a divine testimony in oracular
form, the authority of which is recognized by the assembly.
The earliest major rhetorical handbook, Aristotle's Rhetoric, does not
address the testimonies of the gods, but it does give pride of place to the
"testimonies of the ancients." 39 Under the heading of άτεχνοι πίστεις,
"inartistic proofs," Aristotle includes a section on μάρτυρες. These he
groups into two classes, ancient and recent, the former being generally
more reliable than the latter and alone qualified to speak to the moral qual­
ity of an act: 40
περί δε μαρτύρων, μάρτυρες είσιν διττοί, οι μεν παλαιοί οι δε πρόσφατοι, και
τούτων οι μεν μετέχοντες του κινδύνου οι δ ' εκτός, λέγω δε παλαιούς μεν τους τε
ποιητας και όσων άλλων γνωρίμων είσιν κρίσεις φανεραί.
Concerning witnesses: Witnesses are of two kinds: ancient and recent; and of the lat­
ter, some share the risk [of being brought to trial] while others do not. I call "ancient
witnesses" the poets and any other well-known persons whose judgments are clear.
(Aristotle, Rhet. 1.15.13)
και οι μετέχοντες του κινδύνου, άν δόξωσι ψεύδεσθαι. οι μεν ουν τοιούτοι τούτων
μόνον μάρτυρες είσιν, ει γέγονεν ή μη, ει εστίν ή μη, περί δε του ποιον ού
μάρτυρες, οίον ει δίκαιον ή άδικον, εί συμφέρον ή άσύμφορον οι δ ' απωθεν περί
τούτων πιστότεροι, πιστότατοι δ' οι παλαιοί· αδιάφθοροι γάρ.
There are some [recent witnesses] who share the risk [of being brought to trial], if
they should appear to perjure themselves. Such persons are only witnesses of whether
or not something has happened, that is, whether or not something is the case; they
are not witnesses to the quality of the act—of whether it was just or unjust, or
whether it conferred advantage or not. O n such matters, outsiders are more credible
witnesses, and ancient ones the most credible; for they are incorruptible. (Ibid.,
1.15.16-17)
Ideal ancient witnesses, Aristotle explains, are figures like Homer and Solon,
"well-known persons whose judgments are clear." Such figures are wise
enough in their own right and distant enough from the events of a case to
give trustworthy judgments on the quality of acts. They are especially
qualified to act as witnesses because they are αδιάφθοροι, "incorruptible."
What Aristotle calls παλαιοί πάρτυρες, "ancient witnesses," the first-
century C.E. Roman rhetorician Quintilian calls auctoritates, "authori­
ties," and among them he expressly includes divina testimonia, "the
41
testimonies of the gods." Quintilian writes:
Ponitur a quihusdam, et quidem in parte prima, deorum auctoritas, quae est ex responsis,
ut "Socraten esse sapientissimum. " Id rarum est, non sine usu tarnen
Quae cum
propria causae sunt, divina testimonia vocantur, cum aliunde arcessuntur, argumenta.
Under this head, and even as the first item, some put the authority of the gods, which
is derived from oracles, like the one that said that Socrates was the wisest of people
[Plato, Apol. 21 A]. This is rare, but nevertheless useful.... When these belong to the
cause, they are called "divine testimonies"; when adduced from elsewhere, they are
"arguments." (Quintilian, Inst. 5.11.42)
Lest the clarity of the divina testimonia be obscured by haphazard appeals
not only to oracles but also to augury, astrology, and other types of less
controlled divination, Quintilian codifies the practice, which had been in
effect at least since the time of Demosthenes, whereby divine testimony is
officially admissible and rhetorically persuasive in the lawcourt and in the
assembly. 42
In light of the evidence of both the speeches and the handbooks, it is
possible to draw a few conclusions about the divine testimony motif in
the Greek rhetorical tradition. While it is by no means monolithic, cer-
tain recognizable features do emerge. The speeches and the handbooks
jointly suggest first, the prominence of witnesses generally in the Greek
rhetorical tradition, second, their special use in establishing the good or
bad character of a speaker, and third, the particular status accorded to
ancient and divine testimonies in such cases. Only in the context of this
history can we explain the continued use of divine witness language in the
Hellenistic and Roman periods.
Almost 400 years separate Demosthenes from Paul, the orator from the
apostle, but many rhetorical patterns of language survived, even thrived,
43
from the classical into the Hellenistic and Roman periods. So it is in the
case of the divine testimony motif. Pagan authors certainly continued to
44
make use of it. For example, at the beginning of Lucians Phalaris, the
emissaries of the notorious tyrant deliver a message to the men of Delphi,
wherein Phalaris defends what sort of person he is (όποιος είμι) against
what he insists are slanderous rumors. 45 In this context, Lucian has
Phalaris call Apollo as witness: καλώ δε ών έρώ τον θεον αυτόν μάρτυρα,
"I call the god himself as witness to the things I am about to say" {PhaL
1.1), namely, that Phalaris is not as wicked a person as he is reputed to be. 46
By the beginning of the common era, however, the "God is witness"
motif appears rather less frequently in pagan authors like Lysias and
increasingly frequently in their Jewish and Christian counterparts. 47 By
the time of Paul, it is already a Jewish literary commonplace to speak of
God as a witness in matters relating to character, because in such matters
only God is a qualified witness. We find the idea in the para-scriptural
Jewish literature of the first century B.C.E. The early chapters of the Wis­
dom of Solomon praise personified Wisdom for all her virtues. So, for
example, Wis 1:6: "Wisdom is a kindly spirit, and will not free the blas­
phemer from his words." This is so, the sage explains, because των νεφρών
αύτοΰ μάρτυς ό θεός και της καρδίας αύτοΰ επίσκοπος αληθής καί της
γλώσσης ακουστής, "God is the witness of his inmost thoughts, and the
true overseer of his heart, and the hearer of his tongue." That is, Wisdom
is a just judge because God is a trustworthy witness. Whether this bit was
originally composed in Hebrew or in Greek, formally this is classic Hebraic
parallelismus membrorum, where the three phrases are mutually interpre­
tive. 48 For God to be the μάρτυς των νεφρών means that he is uniquely
qualified to be a character witness, to vouch for or against the thoughts and
intentions of the human heart. 49
The great Jewish writers of the first century C.E. attest the motif, as
well. In his treatise On Drunkenness, Philo explains that Moses speaks of
wine figuratively to represent five different conditions (folly, insensibility,
greed, cheerfulness, and nakedness), which Philo expounds in turn. In the
section on folly, Philo considers God s command to Aaron and his sons
not to drink wine when they enter the tabernacle, lest they die (Lev 10:9).
The tabernacle, Philo explains, represents the idea of virtue generally, and
the altar particular virtues. But why, Philo wonders, is the tabernacle
sometimes called σκηνή μαρτυρίου, the tent of witness? Perhaps, he sug­
gests, because ό άψευδής θεός αρετής έστι μάρτυς, "God who does not lie
is the witness of virtue" {Ebr. 139). 50 The ascription μάρτυς αρετής, "wit­
ness of virtue," which appears nowhere in the LXX with reference to God
(or anyone else, for that matter), is nevertheless very much at home in the
thought of Philo.
Philo is not alone in thinking of God as the μάρτυς αρετής. In a very
different context, at the conclusion of Against Apion, Josephus summarizes
all that he has said to vindicate the Jews from the slanderous charges of
their detractors. They say, among other things, that Moses was a vulgar
person. But, Josephus counters, Moses has for his own μάρτυς αρετής,
first of all God and also time itself: τω δέ τής αρετής πάλαι μεν ό θεός, μετ'
εκείνον δέ μάρτυς ό χρόνος εΰρηται γεγενημένος, "Of [Moses'] virtue, from
of old, God, and after him, time, is found to be witness" (C Αρ. 2.290). 51
That is, God is not only the μάρτυς αρετής in general, but the witness of
Moses' αρετή, in particular, when it is called into question.
In addition, Josephus frequently speaks of God as witness in matters of
good or bad character, even in the absence of the word αρετή. At A.J.
5.113, in Josephus' retelling of the Israelite occupation of Canaan, the
Reubenites, Gadites, and Menassites protest that the altar they have built
is not an alternative altar from the one in the tabernacle but simply a non­
functioning copy, a memorial identifying them with their kinfolk across
the Jordan (cf. Josh 22:21-29). That such was their reason for building
the altar, they say, μάρτυς... γένοιτο ό θεός άξιόχρεως, "may God be a suf­
ficient witness" {Ant. 5.113). Josephus is unique in using the optative
"may God be" here, but the content is very much in keeping with what
we have seen so far. There is a moral question concerning the αίτια,
"motive," of the three tribes in building the altar. Only God can, and in
fact God does, attest their righteous intention in the matter.
Again, book 1 of the War includes an account of a conspiracy by Pher-
oras and Anitpater to poison Herod the Great. After Pheroras has died
and Herod learns of the failed plan, the king interrogates Pheroras' widow.
Terrified, the woman pleads for an honest hearing from the king and
from θεός ό μάρτυς έμοί τής αληθείας πλανηθήναι μή δυνάμενος, "God
the witness to the truth of my words who cannot be deceived {B.J.
1.595)." God is an ideal witness because he cannot be deceived; one
thinks here of Aristotle, Rhet. 1.15.17, where ancient witnesses are ideal
because they are αδιάφθοροι, "incorruptible." Similarly, a bit later on in
the same story, Antipater's last words before his execution are: θεός εστίν
μοι του μηδέν άδικείν μάρτυς, "God is my witness that I have done no
wrong" {B.J. 1.639).
In one place Josephus even calls God to be his own μάρτυς αρετής,
when his αρετή appears to be suspect. The famous scene in the War in
which Josephus evades his part in the suicide pact at Jotapata begins with
Josephus' prayer to God agreeing to surrender to the Romans. Since God
has abandoned the Jews, and since he has chosen Josephus as his prophet
to the Romans, Josephus agrees with God to go ahead and surrender to
Nicanor. But, he adds in haste, μαρτύρομαι δέ ώς ου προδότης, άλλα σος
ειμί διάκονος {B.J. 3.354). Thackeray translates aptly, "I take thee to wit­
52
ness that I go, not as a traitor, but as thy minister." While it is possible, in
theory, for μαρτύρομαι to have a simple middle sense, "I testify concerning
myself," in practice it almost always has the technical meaning, "I call to
witness." 53 That is, the subject of the verb does not himself testify; rather,
he summons someone else to do so. In Josephus' case, the verb is addressed
to God. Josephus calls God to witness to his righteous motives in this
(admittedly morally questionable) act. God is his μάρτυς αρετής.
There is, however, one exception in Josephus to the pattern we have
identified. At A.J. 1.243, where Josephus tells the story of Abraham's
sending a servant to secure a wife for Isaac (Gen 24:1-9), he briefly
explains the Israelite custom of swearing an oath by placing one's hand
under the thigh of the other party. With their hands so placed, Josephus
says, επικαλούνται τον θεον μάρτυρα των έσομένων, "they invoke God as
witness to the things they are about to do" {A.J. 1.243). Significant for
our purposes is that Josephus speaks of God as witness in the setting of an
Israelite oath. But in keeping with biblical usage, and unlike the Pauline
sayings, in this oath setting God is called as witness to future acts (των
έσομένων) that are promised by the parties involved. This exception, then,
tends to confirm rather than undermine the rule.
We know, too, that this motif is still in use well after the first century
C.E. It is attested twice in the third-century C.E. Pseudo-Clementine
Homilies. In the second homily, Nicetas assures Clement that he and
Aquila, although they accompanied the wicked Simon, they were not
party to any of his evil deeds. Nicetas insists, μάρτυς ό θεός ώς ουδέν αύτω
ημείς συνειργασάμεθα άσεβες, "God is witness that we committed no
impiety together with him" {Ps.-Clem. 2.27). 54 The thirteenth homily con­
sists largely of a long speech by Peter on chastity. In the conclusion to this
speech, Peter compares adultery to murder, arguing that the former is a
worse sin than the latter. In support of this claim he says, μάρτυς θεός,
πολλοί φόνοι μοιχεία μία, "God is witness, many murders are like one act
of adultery" {Ps.-Clem. 13.19). Here it is not Peters own morals, but rather
a question of moral principle, to which God is called to testify.
In the mid-fourth century C.E., in a very different religious milieu, the
emperor Julian wrote a Hymn to the Mother of the Gods, an ode to the Phry­
55
gian Cybele who was worshiped by the Romans as Magna Mater. At the
end of the hymn, the emperor excuses himself for breaking off the dis­
course where he does: "What then remains for us to say? Especially since it
was permitted me to compose this in a breath, in a short part of a night,
having neither done prior reading nor researched the subject, nor even
intended to speak on these matters before asking for these writing tablets.
The goddess is witness of what I say (μάρτυς δέ ή θεός μοι του λόγου)" {Or.
56
5.19). Lest the reader think that Julian left off where he did for some
irresponsible reason, he protests that he wrote the whole thing in the space of
a night with no prior preparation. But how can the reader know this? The
goddess, the Magna Mater, is witness to what he says.
It is perhaps no surprise to find Julian, that great enthusiast of classical
culture, employing this idiom of classical rhetoric. It might be less obvi­
ous to some why the apostle Paul should do so. But when we find the
motif in the Jewish tradition before Paul, other Jewish writers contempo­
rary with Paul, and Christian authors after Paul, a rhetorical context
emerges in which the Pauline sayings fit quite naturally. In this rhetorical
context, that of the Greco-Roman divine testimonies, the speaker names
the god as a witness on his behalf. It is therefore the god, not the speaker,
who swears.
In closing, it is clear first of all that, the history of interpretation notwith­
standing, the self-imprecatory oath is a poor fit for the rhetorical context
of the Pauline "God is witness" sayings. In all five instances, the apostle s
time reference is past rather than future. In no case does he promise to
fulfill some course of action; rather, he insists upon the uprightness of his
past behavior. In no case is God a witness between parties or against a
party; God is always a witness for the apostle. It is equally clear, however,
that the Greek rhetorical tradition of divine testimonies, as it was received
and adapted in Judaism of the Hellenistic and Roman periods, is a very
plausible rhetorical context for these sayings. For Paul, as for Demos­
thenes, Aristotle, Philo and Josephus, when the moral quality of an act or
intention is in question, a speaker may rightly appeal to the testimony of
God, the only truly incorruptible witness, that he is in the right. In such
appeals, Paul is not swearing anything; rather he is inviting God to swear
concerning him.
To put it differently, "God is witness" is close in meaning to another
Pauline expression that appears in similar contexts: "God knows." An
example is 2 Cor 11:11, where Paul expresses his affection for the trouble­
some saints in Corinth, saying, δια τί; δτι ουκ αγαπώ ύμας; ό θεός οίδεν,
"Why? Because I do not love you? God knows [that I do]." That is,
though some might doubt whether Paul really loves his Corinthian audi­
tors, God knows that he does, and Gods knowing it verifies that it is so.
Again, a bit further on in the same chapter, Paul relates a litany of per­
sonal weaknesses in which he ironically boasts. Lest this litany sound
somehow contrived, though, Paul prefaces it thus: ό θεός καί πατήρ του
κυρίου Ίησοΰ οίδεν, ό ών εύλογητος είς τους αιώνας, δτι ου ψεύδομαι,
"The God and father of the lord Jesus, who is blessed forever, knows that I
am not lying" (2 Cor 11:31 ). 5 7
This is not to say that Paul never takes an oath, nor that he does not
invoke the name of God in self-imprecation. 58 Rather, what I have shown
in this article is that, in the five places at which Paul names God as his
witness, this is not what he is doing. Rather, Paul is participating in a rhe­
torical tradition as old as the Athenian assembly, one that took on a parti­
cularly monotheistic cast in the Jewish literature of the Hellenistic and
Roman periods, and survived for centuries thereafter. For Paul, the God
of Israel is the μάρτυς αρετής, the one uniquely qualified to vouch for one s
character when it is in question.