The "two source hypothesis" (henceforth "2SH"), the dominant theory
explaining the relationship between the synoptic gospels, argues that Mark
was written first, and that both Matthew and Luke independently used
both Mark as well as another text, called Q. Crucial to this model is the
independence of Luke from Matthew. If it can be demonstrated that one
used the other then the existence of Q becomes redundant.
If, within a parallel shared by all three synoptics, it can be shown that
Matthew and Luke agree against Mark, this has the potential to demon­
strate a literary relationship between Matthew and Luke, and so under­
mine the 2SH. There are many such examples of this in the synoptics.
However, these "minor agreements" are not all the same, and many do not
demonstrate anything at all. For example, if both Matthew and Luke agree
against Mark by using δε instead of καί, this does not prove anything other
1
than Marks poor grammar. Other agreements can be explained through a
demonstrated overlap of Mark with Q. Other examples can be explained
as coincidental agreements of independent redaction on the part of Mat­
thew and Luke. Finally, there is a small remnant that can only be explained
2
as textual corruption. This remainder might also be explained by appeal­
ing to different recensions or redactions of the canonical gospels.
Michael Goulder argued, "Logically, it would take only one really strik­
ing minor agreement to destroy [the 2SH]." 3 If there was one minor agree­
ment that Goulder had in mind when he said this, it would likely be the
"most notorious of the minor agreements" (2003): Matt 26:68|Luke 22:64
(|Mark 14:65). 4 Matthew and Lukes inclusion of the question τίς έστιν ό
παίσας σε ("who is striking you")—a question missing from the parallel
text of Mark—is a minor agreement that, according to Mark Goodacre,
"tests the [two-source hypothesis] and finds it wanting." 5 It is "the most
difficult of all the minor agreements." 6
This paper will investigate this minor agreement, exploring how advo­
cates of the 2SH negotiate this "one really striking minor agreement," as
well as how their opponents react. This minor agreement is often consid­
ered in the light of textual criticism, and so this paper will start with schol­
ars who adopt a text critical approach (such as Streeter, Tuckett and
Neirynck). Some argue that the minor agreements result from recensions/
redactions of the synoptics no longer extant, and this will be the next
approach considered. Next are those who attempt to "make sense" of the
text "as it is," including R.E. Brown, Michael Goulder and William Farmer.
This paper will not attempt to solve this minor agreement, but it will con­
sider what might be learnt from it.
The reading of Mark 14:65 as found in the 27th Edition of Nestle-Aland,
where τίνες ("some") demand that Jesus προφήτευσον ("prophesy!"), has
strong support, including N, A, B, and D. 7 However, there are variants that
read, προφήτευσον νυν 8 χρίστε τις εστίν ο παισας σε ("prophesy now
Christ, who is striking you"). 9 The longer variant is "supported in each of
the three main streams of textual tradition," 10 as is the shorter version. An
agreement between K, A, B, and D (along with the absence of any contrary
papyri witnesses) makes the case for the shorter reading considerably stron­
ger. In spite of the weight of the external evidence, some have argued that
the original text of Mark contained the longer variant (including Schmie-
del, Lietzmann, Finegan, Kilpatrick, Burrows, and Schmithals). 11
There is another variant in Mark 14:65 that often goes unnoticed:
Αυτω... περικαλυπτειν ("to blindfold him") is missing from D, a, sy 5 , and
bo m s s . Codex Bezae reads και ηρξαντο τίνες ενπτυειν τω προσωπω αυτού·
και εκολαφιζον αυτό και ελεγεν αυτω προφήτευσον ("and certain men
began to spit in his face and beat him, and said to him 'prophesy!' "). The
external weight falls in favor of including these words. 12
Finally, for the purposes of this paper, it is to be noted that there are no
significant variants in Matt 26:68. 1 3
Streeter argues that, although the longer variant might be original, and
that it is possible that "the words have accidentally dropped out of the text
of Mark both in K, B, L, D," it is more likely that the shorter reading of
14
Mark is original. This is a text, according to Streeter, "which has specially
invited assimilation" and "the MS evidence suggests that... a certain mea­
sure of assimilation has infected the Κ Β L text... at this particular con­
15
text." Streeter argues that τίς έστιν ό παίσας σε has been assimilated from
Luke to Matthew, which would mean that textual corruption has occurred
twice: once for the Markan variant, and once for a scribal harmonization
of Matthew to Luke. In both Mark and Luke Jesus is blindfolded before
being struck and commanded to prophesy (Mark l4:65|Luke 22:64). 16
The blindfolding does not occur in Matthew and Streeter argued that Mat­
thew "would have been unlikely to omit such a striking point, had it
occurred in his source, more especially as the whole point of the taunt
'Prophesy who it is that struck thee' depends upon the fact that He was
prevented by the veil from seeing who did it." 17 Thus, Streeter concludes
"the original text of Matthew and of Mark omitted the veiling and the
words 'Who it is, etc.'." 18 For Streeter, both the authenticity of the Markan
variant that does not have the blindfold, and the conjectured "variant" in
Matthew that does not have the question "stand or fall together." 19
Tuckett agrees with Streeter that the blindfolding in Mark and the ques­
tion in Matthew are both not original. The variants in Mark that have the
blindfolding read περικαλυπτειν αυτού το πρόσωπον ("they covered his
face"), while the one that omits it reads ενπτυειν τω προσωπω αυτού ("they
spit in his face"). In both there is πρόσωπον ("face"), but in both it is
receiving different action. The omission of blindfolding connects spitting
and the face (πρόσωπον). LXX-Isaiah 50:6 20 may stand behind Marks nar-
rative, but this allusion is weakened in Matthew by the blindfolding. This
leads Tuckett to conclude that it could be that the theme of blindfolding
21
was not original to Mark (1983, 73 and 1984, 137). Because "Matthew
is clearly dependent on Mark alone for the passion narrative" and the ques­
tion only makes sense in a Lukan context, the Streeter proposed emenda­
22
tion for Matthew "is by no mean impossible."
Luke is following a different train of thought in this pericope from what
is found in Matthew and Mark, and the whole scene has quite different
overtones in Matthew/Mark from what is found in Luke. In Luke there is
no mention of spitting or πρόσωπον and thus "has no allusion to the word­
ing of Isa 50." 23 In Mark the demand to prophesy has a dark ironic quality,
as even as this command is issued "one of Jesus' prophecies is being ful­
filled at that very moment, just outside in the courtyard". 24 In other words,
Jesus is suffering abuse as a prophet, and in this context "'Prophesying'
thus involves prediction of the future." 25 Blindfolding is not relevant in
this context, as it does not restrict the ability to predict the future. How­
ever, within a Lukan context, the demand to prophesy "refers to exercising
the gift of second sight, overcoming the limitations of the blindfold." 26
Tuckett argues that because Matthew is clearly leaning on Mark alone as a
source, Matthews scene operates within the Markan and not the Lukan
assumptions of what prophesying mean. Thus, Tuckett concludes "the
question 'Who hit you?' only has relevance in the Lukan text," suggesting
that it is secondary in Matthew. 27
Neirynck agrees with Streeter and Tuckett that the question was added
to Matthew, but disagrees that the blindfolding in Mark is secondary. The
variant in Mark that omits the blindfolding is explicable as a harmonization
from Matthew, which also lacks blindfolding. 28 Neirynck also notes Kil-
patrick's contention that the omission of blindfolding might be the result
of homoeoteleuton: εμ αυτω και περικαλ αυτού το πρόσωπον became
εμπτυειν το πρόσωπον, which was grammatically corrected to εμπτυειν τω
προσωπω. 29 Neirynck does not clearly note what blindfolding accomplishes
in Mark, where without the question there appears to be a demand to "play
the prophet" (as contrasted to the a demand for a specific disclosure of
someone's identity). Blindfolding does not restrict the ability to utter a
prophetic utterance.
Neirynck argues that the difference between Luke and Mark is plain:
"Luke has six words only out of twenty-seven in common with Mark." 30
Unlike Matthew, the blindfolding in Luke is thoroughly integrated into
the story. There is no spitting to complicate things, and δέροντες in 22:63
provides a nice antecedent for παίσας in 22:64. 31 Additionally the use of
έπηρώτων in 22:64 means it is "scarcely possible to isolate the question τις
έστιν ό παίσας σε as an added element in the Lukan context." 32
Goulder had argued that because παίω is not a "Lukan word," occurring
only here in Luke-Acts, that it is likely that Luke borrowed it from Mat­
thew. 33 Neirynck counters this by noting that it is a hapax also in Matthew
(as well as in Mark). Neirynck argues, "The verb παίω is not more Matthean
than it is Lukan and the use of the verb can scarcely be the decisive factor
in a confrontation between Goulder (the question original in Matthew)
and Streeter (the question original in Luke)." 34 The elimination in Luke of
the allusion to Isaiah is also something for which there is precedent, as
Luke elsewhere demonstrates "considerable freedom" in his dealings with
Markan uses of scripture. 35 Thus, Neirynck concludes that "the most prob-
able origin of τίς έστιν ό παίσας σε in Luke 22:64 is Lukan redaction of
36
Mark 14:65."
Neirynck has a preference for arguing that minor agreements are the
result of coincidental and independent redaction by both Matthew and
Luke. The present case is an exception to this, as Neirynck can think of
no sound argument that can provide a redactional solution. The main
problem for Neirynck is not as much the impossibility of both Luke and
Matthew coincidentally choosing to add the same five words, but the fact
that Matthew does so while leaving out the blindfolding, rendering the
words meaningless. 37 Neirynck finds various attempts to render this epi­
sode intelligible in Matthew (to be discussed at greater length below) not
persuasive. Thus, that Matthew excised the blindfolding, so that Jesus
could be spit upon in the face, or that Jesus is simply being asked to give
the names of those hitting him (Gundry) indicates "exegetical inventive­
ness" more than anything else for Neirynck. 38
Neirynck believes that τίς έστιν ό παίσας σε must be an interpolation in
Matthew, quoting C.H. Turner: "I prefer to conjecture that it is an unde­
tected insertion by scribes, of the type of dozens of others that we can
detect, into the text of Matthew from the text of Luke—seeing that, while
the question makes sense in St. Luke, where the covering of our Lord's face
has been mentioned, it makes no sense in St. Matthew, where nothing of
the sort has been indicated." 39 The presence of τίς έστιν ό παίσας σε
"remains the only refractory element in Matthew," and thus is best
explained as an early addition to the text for which we have no textual
evidence. Neirynck suggests the demand to prophesy is indigenous to
Matthew and only becomes difficult once the question is added. 40 A scribe
thus very early in the textual tradition imported the question from Luke.
There is, as we have seen, a dynamic relationship between textual criti­
cism and the minor agreements. Streeter, Tuckett and Neirynck argue for
emendation of the text for which there exists no textual evidence. This
raises some questions about the place of conjectural emendation within
the practice of textual criticism. A standard view is articulated by Kurt and
Barbara Aland in one of their twelve basic rules for textual criticism: "Tex-
tual difficulties cannot be solved by conjecture, or by positing glosses or
interpolations, etc., where the textual tradition itself shows no break; such
attempts amount to capitulation before difficulties and are themselves vio-
lations of the text." 41 Slightly more flexible are the views of Kenyon: "it has
been usual to answer that in the criticism of the New Testament [conjec-
ture] has no place at all. Where manuscript evidence is scanty, as it is for
many of the classical authors, it happens at times that a passage is obvi-
ously and certainly corrupt in all extant copies; and then the defect must
be healed by conjecture, if it is to be healed at all." 42 Kenyon goes on to
note that this practice, at times necessary with other antique authors, is
hardly needed in with respect to the New Testament "where the evidence
is so plentiful and varied." 43 Metzger essentially agrees with Kenyon, per-
haps allowing more room for conjecture: "One must admit the theoretical
legitimacy of applying to the New Testament a process which has so often
been found essential in the restoration of the right text in classical authors." 44
Nevertheless, Metzger also believes that at times this practice has been "at
times carried to absurd extremes" even within the study of the classics. 45
For Metzger any conjecture would be related primarily to the Catholic
Epistles and the Apocalypse where the manuscript evidence is more lack-
ing. 46 Strugnell goes further and affirmatively endorses the use of conjec-
tural emendation. His position can perhaps best be summarized by
Wetstein, whom Strugnell quotes: "Conjectural emendations are never to
be rashly admitted or rashly rejected." 47 Strugnell disagrees with the view
that because the evidence for the New Testament texts is so plentiful and
varied (unlike the classics) that the use of conjecture is required. Strugnell
suggests, "this Variety' would be a clear proof only of the badness of the
tradition." 48
Behind this debate lies another issue that directly relates to the text critical
approach to the minor agreement in Matt 26:68. Kilpatrick argued, "We
may assume as a rule of thumb that at each point the true text has survived
somewhere or other among our manuscripts." 49 Strugnell responded to
this bold claim by noting that for it to hold, the manuscript tradition must
be uniform (which, of course, it is not), or "where the manuscript tradition
is divided, the reading of the archetype, identical with that of the auto-
graph, will have survived somewhere or other." 50 Outside of some type of
"special Providence" watching over the transmission of the text, this view
is untenable. Kilpatrick later agreed with this argument, and supplements
it by saying that if there was some special Providence watching over the
text of the New Testament, "we might wonder why this Providence has
not exerted itself a little further to ensure that at each point of variation
the original reading would be manifest and immediately demonstrable." 51
Kilpatrick concedes "we cannot assert that the original form of the text has
for certain survived at every point somewhere or other among our wit-
nesses." 52 Nevertheless, Kilpatrick is still not convinced by Strugnell's argu-
ment that conjecture ought to be used within New Testament textual
criticism. One problem is that we may in fact correct mistakes that were in
the autograph itself. 53 There is also the danger of a "considerable rewriting
of the New Testament." 54 This is, after all, "guesswork" wrought with
uncertainty. 55
Strugnell argues "the editor who holds that Matthew and Luke indepen-
dently used Mark must consider secondary those readings in Mark where
Matthew and Luke conjunctively agree against Mark, and against all the
manuscripts he must restore to Mark a text equivalent to that of Matthew
and Luke." 56 This may be true in some cases, but it fails to note other
explanations for minor agreements, such as overlap with Q, or plausible
explanations of independent redaction. This policy offers a fair description
of what Tuckett, Streeter, and Neirynck are doing, inasmuch as their views
have compelled them (at least insofar as Matt 26:68 in concerned) to see
the offending elements as secondary.
Wheeler argues for a separation of textual criticism from source criti-
cism, so that "the textual decision must be made prior to the discussion of
source theory." 57 This is so textual criticism remains a tool to establish the
text and not any given source theory. There is a certain obvious value to
this, although there is no reason why a choice between these two functions
of textual criticism need be absolute, as long as they are not conflated and
confused. Tuckett responds that non-specialists in the field of textual criti-
cism often defer to the experts, letting them perform their work so that a
"pure text" might emerge with which exegetical and source-critical work
can commence. 58 However, he continues that such a separation of textual
criticism from other forms of analysis is ultimately not justifiable, unless
New Testament textual critics were to stay exclusively within the realm of
external evaluation of textual witnesses. 59 As soon as internal evidence is
brought to play, textual criticism has entered into the realm of exegesis.
This is more clearly the case when an argument in made based on how a
variant does or does not accord with an author's theology. Thus, internal
criteria are often a form of exegesis, and thus rely upon work being done
in New Testament studies outside the "pure" realm of textual criticism.
Tuckett argues that his suggestion for Matt 26:68 is not "changing the
facts to fit the theory," as the only "facts" that we have are documents usu-
ally hundreds of years removed from the original texts penned by the
author(s). The Greek texts we have in front of us are simply "as good an
approximation to the texts of the original as our evidence will allow us to
achieve." 60
Neirynck argues that his solution for Matt 26:68 is also not a misdi­
rected conjecture, but rather falls comfortably within normal text critical
criteria. Scribal harmonization between the synoptics is one of the more
common forms of textual corruption, and this is exactly what his proposed
emendation would address in this minor agreement. Τίς έστιν ό παίσας σε
was introduced into Matthew be means of harmonization from Luke, and
61
as such arguing its secondary nature is not a "desperate measure."
Goulder agrees that our textual witnesses might all be in error, but
argues "we are justified in positing such only when we cannot make sense
62
of our texts without them." Whether we can "make sense of our texts," at
least as far as Matt 26:68 is concerned, depends upon how persuasive
Goulder's explanation of this text is (to be considered below). If Matthew
is fully intelligible, then Goulder's point has some weight, but if his attempt
is deemed a failure, then by his own admission, we are justified in positing
an emendation.
Farmer reacts by arguing if emendations were allowed that have no tex­
tual witnesses whatsoever (such as what has been suggested for Matt 26:68)
that this would revolutionize this discipline of textual criticism. 63 In spite
of the argument forwarded above by Strugnell, Tuckett and Neirynck, it is
hard to dismiss Farmer's concerns. The further we wander into conjecture,
the less the evidence can provide a control. The further removed we are
from controls, the more tenuous our conclusions become. Does a lack of
clarity in the text give us a warrant to change the text when there is no
textual evidence? If so, why have Streeter, Tuckett and Neirynck not been
more concerned with Mark, who has Jesus being blindfolded for no appar­
ent reason? Perhaps the reason is because that narrative flaw in Mark does
not appear to directly threaten the two-source-hypothesis?
What are Streeter, Tuckett and Neirynck really seeking to do? Do they
actually desire that future versions of the Greek New Testament remove
the question "who is striking you?" from Matthew? Given the context of
the discussion, the arguments put forth have been intended, it seems, more
to explain this particular minor agreement than to make actual changes in
future texts of the Greek New Testament. Nevertheless, their claim that the
text at this point is corrupt remains. Perhaps their conjectural emendation
would be more palatable were we to think of it as something belonging
within the critical apparatus than in the body of the text. It might be better
to leave the text somewhat unintelligible than to introduce changes for
which there is no textual evidence.
Another way to solve this and other minor agreements involving conjec­
ture includes postulating non-extant recensions/redactions of Mark as the
source from which both Matthew and Luke derived their agreements against
the canonical Mark. Compared to textual criticism, source criticism is less
conservative a discipline. It was noted above that the use of conjecture
within the discipline of textual criticism is highly suspect for many of its
practitioners, but the use of conjecture within source criticism is common,
being part and parcel of the discipline. With this in mind, it is not difficult
to understand why, for many, solutions proposed upon source critical
grounds are more attractive than those proposed upon text critical ones.
However, we will see that there is some overlap between the text critical
and source critical solutions, beyond the common use of conjecture.
A. Ennulat and J.P. Brown argue that Luke and Matthew were familiar
with a version of Mark that was later than the canonical version. 64
J.P. Brown argues that Luke and Matthew were familiar with a version of
Mark that was later than the canonical version. However, for Brown this
later version was not so much a different recension or redaction, as it
was a product of scribal alteration. Brown argues that Matthew and Luke
were familiar with a version of Mark that had fewer (or perhaps no) minor
agreements. Because "the text of Mark which eliminates the most agree­
ments between Matthew and Luke is the 'Caesarean; particularly fam
13," 65 it is in this textual family where we will find a version of Mark
closest to what Matthew and Luke used. For example, the question τίς
έστιν ό παίσας σε is present in the Caesarean text (Θ W fam 13 Ν Σ 700
1071 geo). 66
Sanday agrees with J.P. Brown, at least in that Luke and Matthew's used
a version of Mark later than all extant manuscripts ("Deutero-Mark"), as
"the coincidences [of Matthew and Luke agreeing against Mark] seem to
67
me to belong to a later form of text rather than an earlier." Because the minor
68
agreements often clarify and improve, they must be seen as secondary.
Deutero-Mark for some is only slightly different from its canonical
cousin (as with Abbot, Hawkins, Sanday, Strecker, Schnelle, and Luz),
while for others it is significantly "expanded and revised" (as with Fuch,
Kogler and Niemand). 6 9
H. Koester agrees that, "the agreements between Matthew and Luke
against Mark confirms that Mark's original text is not preserved." 70 He,
unlike those just mentioned, believes that Matthew used a proto-Mark,
and that Luke used an "expanded variant" of this proto-Mark. 71 Proto­
Mark was later rewritten and became Secret Mark, which in turn was also
re-written to become canonical Mark. 72
Regardless of whether we believe Matthew and Luke used a version of
Mark written earlier or later than canonical Mark, this hypothesis only
addresses certain elements of the minor agreement under discussion in this
paper. If Luke and Matthew used a version of Mark that had the question
τίς έστιν ό παίσας σε, then we have explained the agreement of Matthew
and Luke against Mark in respect to these five words. This, however, does
not explain why Matthew omits the blindfolding. Unless one is persuaded
by one of the explanations (to be considered below) that attempt to make
sense of the absence of the blindfolding in Matthew without positing cor­
ruption in its text, one half of the puzzle remains unsolved.
Of course, one could suggest that a proto-Matthew rather than a proto/
deutero-Mark, something argued by Vaganay. 73 If we move the problem
away from Mark to Matthew, we still leave unanswered how it is through
any recension Luke independently came to agree with Matthew with
the inclusion of τίς έστιν ό παίσας σε. Of course, we could suggest there
was a version of Matthew did not have the taunting question. We would
then conclude that the question was added later to the canonical version
of Matthew, but then we have come a complete circle by saying basi­
cally what Streeter said. We have merely moved the rationale from a text
critical ground to a source critical one, without any important change in
content.
R.E. Brown argues that no textual emendation is required to understand
Matt 26:68. Matthew essentially follows Mark's theology, although he
rearranges and clarifies it somewhat. 74 In Mark LXX Isa 50:6-7 is in the
background, so that "in their contemptuous treatment of Jesus as a false
prophet... the Sanhedrists are unconsciously fulfilling a prophecy—the
great Isaian prophecy revealing that by self-giving a victim can turn the
signs of human rejection into victory with God's help." 75 Matthew follows
Mark's lead but makes the connection to Isaiah more explicit by changing
"cover his face" to "spit in his face." 76 Brown writes, "not only would the
double mention of Yace' be stylistically awkward, but one could scarcely
spit in a covered face." 77
This argument explains the removal of the blindfold, but not the demand
of Jesus to prophesy. Brown argues that behind this incident in both Mark
and Matthew is a game, mentioned by the 2nd century BCE Onomasticon
of Pollux, that the readers of the gospel would have easily identified. This
was a "guessing game" where a player's eyes are covered and someone strikes
78
him, and the person would have to guess who it was that hit him. Much
like "Who's it?" in a modern context clearly identities what game is being
referred to, so would "Who is it that hit you?" function in the first cen­
79
tury. Brown thus suggests this form of oral tradition is the source for the
minor agreement in Matt 26:68|Luke 22:68. Although Mark does not use
the words "Who is striking you?," Brown argues it would have been obvi­
ous for an ancient reader that he was narrating a cruel version of this
"blind-man bluff game." Matthew streamlines Mark's story, highlighting
important features, and uses the words "Who is striking you?" as an overt
means to denote this game. 80 Luke would have also recognized what Mark
was doing and narrows down this story to only those elements that were
required by this game, so that the spitting is removed. This removal had
the effect of loosing Isaiah from the text. The widespread popularity of the
game explains Matthew and Luke's independent redaction of Mark.
Brown is rather vague about important details in the Matthean plot
line. Are we to assume that "Who is striking you?" would have noted in
shorthand for the ancient readers a series of un-narrated events, including
a covering of Jesus' face after its being spit upon? Something like this would
be necessary for Brown's interpretation to work, otherwise we are left with
a version of blind man's bluff without a "blind man." Additionally, the καί
in Matt 26:67 does not suggest the break in continuity between spitting
and slapping that Brown's reading requires. Because we can not be certain
whether the games mentioned in the 2nd century BCE Onomasticon of
Pollux, upon which Brown's reading is based, would have been known at
all to the readers of the gospels, Brown's interpretation will remain tenta­
tive in any event. Arguing that this game would have would have been
automatically recognized by the readers has not been verified. 81
Making narrative sense of Matthew's Jesus being prompted to identify
who is hitting him sans blindfold is important for Goulder if he wishes to
undermine Streeter, Tuckett and Neirynck's argument for textual corrup­
tion. For the latter it is Matthew's nonsensical quality that indicates a text
critical solution. If Goulder can put forward a compelling interpretation
within a Matthean context that integrates both the question and the
absence of a blindfold, then an important argument in favor of textual cor­
ruption will be undermined. As it happens, Goulder has offered a few
different possibilities.
Goulder argues the reason Matthew did not have Jesus blindfolded was
simply because spitting in someone's face only makes sense without a
blindfold. 82 Goulder notes that there are two groups in Matthew and Mark
mocking Jesus. Mark has the two groups designated as τίνες, ("certain
people"; those who do the spitting), and ύπηρέται ("attendants of the San­
hédrin"; those who do the beating). Matthew follows Mark except that
that he does not have Jesus blindfolded, knowing that spitting is more
effective (or rather, simply is effective) on a bare face. Matthew also has the
same two groups, except that for him they are distinguished by οι δε (Matt
26:67c). Goulder argues one group in Matthew were spitting and punch­
ing, and the other group was saying "Prophesy!" and έράπισαν Jesus.
Goulder defines ραπίζω as "hitting with a cane," thus differentiating it
from κολαφίζω which he defines as "punching." 83 By defining these terms
like this, two groups are distinguished from each other by what they are
doing and not merely by οι δε. Goulder's understanding of οι δε as mean­
ing a subgroup distinguished from others in a larger group is not univer­
sally accepted. His view is defended by van der Horst as a "well-known and
frequently used syntactical device." 84 There is another possibility defended
by Lagrange and Neirynck where οι δε repeats "subject of the preceding
sentence." 85 If this were accepted in Matt 26:67, it would collapse the two
groups into one, with a large part of Goulder's interpretation collapsing
along with it. Be that as it may, if we accept Goulder's reading, the com­
mand to prophecy and say τίς έστιν ό παίσας σε is still something of a
problem for a Jesus who is not blindfolded. Goulder argues that some are
behind Jesus, beating him "on the back or the head. These latter he cannot
see, so it is suitable to include Mark's 'Prophesy!' " 8 6 Goulder continues by
arguing Luke has both Mark and Matthew's accounts in front of him and
knows that high courts judges do not usually abuse prisoners physically. 87
Luke combines Mark and Matthew by putting the blindfold back on Jesus
(from Mark) and including the abusive question (from Matthew). 88 This
interpretation requires that the reader fill in important blanks in the text,
which, while not impossible, brings to mind Neirynck's comment (men­
89
tioned above) about "exegetical inventiveness."
Elsewhere Goulder suggests that perhaps Matthew might simply "have
90
left out the blindfolding by oversight." This inattentiveness Goulder says
is something that Matthew does "all the time," and he cites three examples
to demonstrate: Matt 14:3-12 has Herod, instead of Herodias, wanting
to kill John (14:5), which creates a problem when later Herod is said to
be grieved for needing to kill the Baptist (14:9); Matthew calls Herod
"tetrarch" instead of following Mark in calling him "king," but slips up
later and refers to him as "king" in 14:9; Matthew left out the detail about
Herod having married Herodias but still has John telling him "you may
91
not have her" (14:4). Neirynck argues that these examples do not provide
a fair parallel for 26:68, in that with each of them Matthew creates prob­
lems for himself, because having departed from Mark at one point, he later
"returns to the text of Mark." However the problem in 26:68 is that the
added question (τίς έστιν ό παίσας σε) "is an addition to the parallel text
in Mark." 92 Neirynck is certainly correct in substance, but has he ade­
quately deflected Goulder's argument? Does one have to establish specific
parallel examples of inattentiveness, or does merely demonstrating in gen­
eral that Matthew was occasionally inattentive suffice?
As has been mentioned, it serves Goulder to present the text, as it now
stands as coherent and meaningful, if he wishes to undermine the view
that the text as we have them is corrupt. However, at one point, through
attempting to portray coherency, Goulder comes close to undermining his
whole project. Arguing against Neirynck, who suggests that in Mark the
demand "Prophesy!" means, "give us a prophecy," Goulder argues that
Luke "expounds" the latent meaning in Mark. Goulder continues, "Mat­
thew will have felt the same need of clarification," 93 and "the meaning of
the taunt is clear from the veiling and hitting, but not crystal clear: it is
made so by Matthew." 94 Unwittingly Goulder has argued for a solution
that can be adopted by the 2SH: if the meaning "Who is hitting you?" is
clearly latent within Mark, then it is not impossible to conclude that this
minor agreement is a coincidental agreement by independent redactions.
That Matthew and Luke use the exact same words is still something of a
problem, but not an insurmountable one. If guessing who was doing the
hitting is "clearly" latent within Mark for both Matthew and Luke, then it
is not odd for both of these to redactionally add the question τίς έστιν ό
παίσας σε. This question could have been expressed with different words,
to be sure, but that two writers expressed it with these particular words is
not an impossible supposition. In short, if the question is as "latent" within
Mark as Goulder suggests, this minor agreement ceases to be the great
problem for the 2SH that it has been. However, it is likely that few of those
who adhere to the 2SH will agree that the question is clearly latent in
Mark, which ironically bolsters Goulder's larger argument.
Farmer takes exception to those, like Streeter, who attempts to solve this
minor agreement through a textual emendation, and argues that no such
drastic measure is required. Working within a neo-Griesbach framework,
Farmer has little problem explaining the minor agreement itself—Luke
copied it from his copy of the gospel of Matthew—but encounters prob­
lems attempting to explain other components of this parallel. Starting with
Matthew, Farmer creates a scenario not very different from one of Goul­
der's above suggestions, namely, Jesus, with spittle running down his face
and being hit by those mocking him, was "so distracted by this abuse he
could only with difficulty have identified those who had struck him." 9 5
Thus, "the text as it stands in Matthew is on all literary, historical, and
form-critical grounds unimpeachable." 96 The same comments made above
about Goulder's similar suggestion apply here. As was mentioned above, it
is crucial for any, who wish to undermine a "Streeter-like" textual emenda­
tion, to render Matthew intelligible at this point, and this Farmer claims
to have achieved. Needless to say, many do not find Matthew's story as
"unimpeachable" as Farmer argues, even with his exegetical suggestions. In
any event, Farmer continues that Luke took over Matthew's story and
made what was implied in his source explicit by putting a blindfold on
Jesus. Farmer notes that Luke gains "verisimilitude" at this point but loses
some of the pathos with the elimination of the spitting. 97 It seems that
Farmer, without realizing it, acknowledges something less than full verisi-
militude in Matthew by noting a gain in this respect in Luke.
Be that as it may, Mark removes the question, but keeps the demand
"Prophesy!" which implies the question. 98 Mark inexplicably retains the
blindfold, and here Farmer runs into a problem: why would Mark elimi-
nate something found in both Matthew and Luke (a double witness), and
why would he take out an element that enhances and clarifies the story?
Farmer argues that "Mark had an editor's right to omit the question." 99
While this is certainly correct, it hardly serves as an explanation. Farmer
argues that that, while the question was perhaps not "absolutely necessary
to the narrative," its removal renders the taunt to "Prophesy!" pointless. 100
Contradictorily, he argues that the omission of this question from Mark
"does not change the narrative in any obvious way." 101 Turning a narrative
element from meaningful to pointless can hardly be considered "not mak-
ing a change." This inconsistency underscores the problem that significant
minor agreements are for the Griesbach hypothesis.
Certainly, Mark's version presents a problem for the 2SH, as well as
Goulder's hypothesis, as they also have to make sense of the blindfold
without the question. The blindfolding fulfills no narrative purpose within
the second gospels narrative: being blindfolded offers no impediment to
prophesy in general, which seems indicated in the Markan context (despite
Farmer and Goulder's argument to the contrary). This problem, however,
is more acute for the Griesbach hypothesis, as within that model Mark had
two sources that both provided him with an excellent reason for Jesus
being blindfolded. These, Mark chose to ignore, and in doing so created an
unintelligible narrative moment.
This paper started by Michael Goulder arguing, "Logically, it would take
only one really striking Minor Agreement to destroy [the 2SH]." 102 If we
find ourselves unhappy with Streeter, Tuckett and Neirynck's conjectural
emendation, and are persuaded that Matthew can intelligibly stand as it is,
then we might conclude that we have found Goulder's one striking exam-
ple in Matt 26:68|Luke 22:64. Does this mean that the 2SH has now been
destroyed? If this were the only piece of evidence allowed into consider-
ation, we would likely conclude that Goulder was correct and abandon the
2SH. However, this is not the only relevant evidence to consider. Streeter,
Tuckett and Neirynck argue for textual corruption sans solid textual evi-
dence here precisely because, at least in their minds, evidence elsewhere is
compelling enough to warrant such a "drastic measure." The 2SH would
have been "destroyed" by this minor agreement if the textual evidence were
closed—that is, if we possessed or knew about all relevant texts and vari-
ants. As it is, we clearly do not have access to all relevant recensions and
versions of the synoptics, we do not know the "transmissional process by
which one gospel came to be used by another evangelist," and we are not
able "to reconstruct with absolute precision the Greek text." 103 In the light
of these vast unknowns, Goulder's claim about "only one really striking
Minor Agreement" falls short of the mark.
We have found two basic types of argument: arguments that attempt to
make sense of the narrative as we have it, and arguments that attempt to
make sense of the text as we have it. In some respects both types of argu-
ments are not of the sort that can be categorically accepted or rejected. For
example, what are we to make of Browns suggestion that behind the slap-
ping resided a type of blind-man's bluff? We noted above obstacles to this
interpretation that give room to pause before accepting it. Likewise, there
is ground for hesitance in accepting Goulder and Farmer's suggestion that
Jesus did not need to be blindfolded for the demand to prophesy "who is
striking you?" to be intelligible. Is the text truly "unimpeachable... as it
stands in Matthew"? 104 Such an argument cannot be conclusively answered.
These readings require the reader to supply vital information not explicitly
found in the text, which of itself does not necessarily lead an interpretation
into error, but lacks probative weight.
Streeter, Tuckett and Neirynck's understanding of the incoherence
within text at least stays close to the actual words as they are found in Mat-
thew, even as they argue that these words are secondary. This makes their
reading more persuasive, although perhaps not in an absolute fashion.
Goulder's argument that Matthew was simply clumsy also stays close to
the text. Whatever else we might think, it must be observed that Goulder's
interpretations are not falsifiable, something he demands from his oppo-
nents. 105 How can we falsify the level of attentiveness at work in the first
evangelist?
Nevertheless, conjectural emendation will never be a satisfying solution.
This paper argued that even if one is persuaded by Streeter, Tuckett and
Neirynck's arguments, the offending text should remain in all releases of
the Greek New Testament. This will serve to maintain the integrity of the
discipline of textual criticism. To change it would be to unfairly privilege
one solution of the synoptic problem over rivals by hiding the problem.
This would serve to aggravate a debate already often overloaded with
polemic.
Additionally, this minor agreement should stand in the text as a service
to those who hold to the 2SH. This minor agreement can serve as a marker
and reminder that this hypothesis is a model and not an exact one-to-one
representation of reality "as it actually was." History is never "general
happenings," but rather unrepeatable particularities. Without documenta-
tion of these particularities historians must construct their histories as
generalities—as models—even though history is never actually like this.
Put another way, "parsimony... is a virtue of explanatory logic; it is not a
feature of historical or literary realities." 106 Considered by itself, this minor
agreement will offer no comfort for the 2SH, and it might be exactly this
lack of comfort that can serve to remind us of the exact nature of this
endeavor, with all its uncertainties and limitations. The actual and specific
events that went towards the agreement of Matt 26:68 and Luke 22:64
against Mark 14:65 are lost in the sands of time and will most likely never
be recovered, leaving us with guesses and conjectures. Although we may be
persuaded that the 2SH best integrates the data relating to the synoptic
problem, this minor agreement can remind us that the synoptic problem
is still a problem, and that all "solutions" proposed are provisional, includ-
ing the 2SH.