Midway through his 1964 study Memory and Manuscript, Birger Ger-
hardsson noted that the Apostolic Fathers' use of the sayings of Jesus indi-
cated either such a free reproduction of these sayings, or such adaptation
to the context, that "we must be extremely careful when attempting to
draw conclusions from sayings of Jesus used in this way, as to which ver-
sion of the text the author knew, or the extent to which the gospel tradi-
tion was fixed at this time." He then paused to observe that "the problem
of the Apostolic Fathers' attitude to the gospel material is thus not easily
solved." 1 Keeping Gerhardsson's warning in mind becomes more even
more important when examining a specific figure like Ignatius of Antioch,
whose use of scripture has been described as "inexact even as compared
with his contemporaries," 2 wherein "even the more obvious reminiscences
and quotations" betray a use of sources "characterized by inexactness and
fragmentation." 3
Century and half-century old warnings aside, however, recent publica-
tions touching upon the presence of written gospel materials in the Igna-
tian corpus signify not only a continuing lack of consensus on the issue of
Ignatius and his sources, but also a lack of agreement as to how one should
even commence approaching this issue. As is often the case with divergent
conclusions and contrasting approaches, this situation indicates that the
issue of whether this question is being formulated properly lurks not so far
beneath the surface of the discussion. 4 Pier Franco Beatrice's recent asser-
tion in the pages of this journal that Ignatius displays knowledge of the
Gospel of the Hebrews, and that this knowledge "should be taken as the
starting point of an unbiased analysis of all the evangelical and apocryphal
material available in Ignatiuss epistles," 5 contrasts with my own cautious
assessment that "there is a strong indication that, even were Ignatius
acquainted with a written gospel, he would not necessarily use it as a nor-
mative authority." 6 Neither of these views precisely match those of Hill,
who has also recently argued that the term "gospel" in Ignatius may (some-
times) have a textual referent, in addition to its meaning of "good news"
(although Hill thinks it most likely that Ignatius is acquainted with the
canonical gospels). 7 This divergence of opinion in regards to Ignatius is not
new, of course. John Barton comments in passing during his 1997 study of
the origins of the biblical canon that scholarly surveys quantifying (or
attempting to quantify) Ignatius' preference for New Testament materials,
as opposed to Old Testament references, vary so much in their results that
Ignatius shows anywhere ^ram 5 to 50 times the use of the New Testament
compared to the Old, depending upon the scholar doing the quantifying.
Barton observes that this "wild discrepancy," as he rightly terms it, is
dependent upon fluctuating definitions of what counts as verifiable "use"
or "reference." 8 All of this previous scholarship, though, indicates that
while any claims of "new" starting points such as Beatrice s do need to be
taken seriously, they also need to be viewed with some reserve.
There are thus three immediate areas of concern that arise in evaluating
aspects of Beatrice's proposal. One is the web of methodological issues one
steps into in any attempt to determine literary dependency in the Aposto-
lic Fathers. 9 The second concern lies in assessing the numerous implica-
tions of his "new" starting point (i.e., Ignatius' knowledge of the Gospel of
the Hebrews) for any future "unbiased" analysis. The third concern is, not
to put too fine a point on it, the sheer length of the article. Beatrices argu-
ment is not easily summarized because of its 50 page length, as well as the
complexity of the relationships he posits between the various sources with
which he deals, and, most dauntingly, his essays overall erudition on a
variety of topics. However, as he himself notes, Beatrice is not the first
scholar to propose that Ignatius is acquainted with the Gospel of the
Hebrews, and my response here is not intended to disprove any connection
between Ignatius and the Gospel of the Hebrews (if one even could prove
such a negative), but rather to probe some of the issues surrounding this
alleged point of textual reliance displayed by Ignatius. 10
Much of the evidence for Ignatius' knowledge of the Gospel of the
Hebrews derives from a seemingly idiosyncratic phrase in his account of a
resurrection appearance of Jesus. Smyrneans 3:2 contains what Beatrice
terms a "strange" statement on the lips of the risen Jesus, ultimately deri­
ving from the Gospel of the Hebrews: "I am not a bodiless demon." Or, as
Kirsopp Lake more accurately renders it: "I am not a phantom without a
body [Λάβετε, ψηλαφήσατέ με και ϊδετε, δτι ουκ ειμί δαιμόνιον
άσώματον]." 11 Despite a cautionary tone, Beatrice notes that "the quota­
tion in Smyrn 3 is alone sufficient" to establish Ignatian dependency on
this Judaic gospel. 12 He bases this assessment upon the testimony of
Jerome. 13 Since Jerome claims to have had firsthand knowledge of the ori­
ginal Aramaic version of this gospel, and since Jerome clearly identifies this
Ignatian passage as deriving from the Gospel of the Hebrews, Beatrice argues
that "we have to acknowledge that Jerome told the truth," and that his
testimony, rather than being viewed as (in the words of other scholars)
"pure fantasy," or coming from "a questionable person," should instead be
accepted with far less suspicion. 14 Before commenting critically upon these
claims, however, we should first retrace Beatrice's steps more carefully. 15
Beatrice argues that the presence of the saying "I am not a bodiless dae­
mon" in both Ignatius and its attribution to "Petrine" materials in a slightly
later period, indicates that all the subsequent references to this curious
phrase, including the Ignatian occurrence, are most likely quotations from
16
a single source. According to his reconstruction this source is known
alternately (and varyingly) by many of the later Fathers as the Didaskalia
Petrou (or Petri Doctrina), Kerygma Petrou, or the Gospel of Peter. 17 Beatrice,
however, argues that these Petrine materials are themselves all ultimately
derived from a single Jewish-Christian gospel, the Gospel of the Hebrews,
which is the immediate source for Ignatius. 18
The statement in question runs as follows:
For I know and believe that he was in the flesh even after the resurrection. And when
he came to those who were with Peter, he said to them, "Reach out, touch me and see
that I am not a bodiless daimon [Λάβετε, ψηλαφήσατέ με και ϊδετε, δτι ουκ είμι
δαιμόνιον άσώματον]." And immediately they touched him and believed, having
been intermixed with his flesh and spirit. For this reason they also despised death, for
they were found to be beyond death. And after his resurrection he ate and drank with
them as a fleshly being, even though he was spiritually united with the Father (Ign.
Smyrn. 3:l-3). 1 9
The nearest N T parallel to this Ignatian passage is found in Luke 24.
While they were talking about this, Jesus himself stood among and said to them,
"Peace be with you." They were startled and terrified, and thought that they were see­
20
ing a ghost [πνεύμα]. He said to them, "Why are you frightened, and why do doubts
arise in your hearts? Look at my hands and my feet; see that it is I myself. Touch me
and see; for a ghost does not have flesh and bones as you see that I have [ψηλαφήσατέ
με και ϊδετε, δτι πνεύμα σάρκα καί όστέα ουκ έχει]" (Luke 24:36-39).
Beatrice notes that "it is not difficult, however, to see that the differences
between the two texts are much more significant than the similarities," and
he thus rejects the view that Ignatius is dependent upon Luke. 21 Indeed, as
many scholars of Ignatius have noted since the time of Lightfoot, if this is
a reference to the Lukan tradition the changes in wording require at least
some comment, if not explanation. 22 Thus William Schoedel observes in
his commentary on the Ignatian corpus that this may be Lukan tradition
if not Luke, or, most likely, a common tradition shared with Luke. 23
However, Beatrice further observes that since the phrase, "I am not a
bodiless demon" is associated by Origen with a source called the Petri doc­
trina, glancing in the direction of Luke will not provide a satisfactory solu­
tion. The evidence from Origen seems to indicate decisively that this saying
comes from what we would term an apocryphal or non-canonical source.
If somebody really wishes to set before us something from that book which is called
the Doctrine of Peter in which the Saviour seems to say to the disciples: "I am not a
demon without a body" [ubi salvator videtur ad discípulos dicere: "Non sum daemo-
nium incorporeum"], then one has to answer him first of all that that book is not
reckoned among the ecclesiastical books and one has to show that this same book is
not Peter's nor by some other inspired by the Spirit of God. 2 4
Thus, when we arrive at the discussion of Ignatius and his writings in Book
3 of Eusebius's Church History, we find that Eusebius says he simply "does
not know" the origin of this phrase.
And the same man writing to the Smyrnaeans, used the following words: I do not
know whence he took them [ουκ οίδ' οπόθεν ρητοις συγκέχρηται], with regard to
Christ, saying: "But I know and believe that he was in the flesh after the resurrection.
And when he came to Peter and those with him he said to them, Take me and feel me
and see that I am not a demon without a body and immediately they touched him and
believed (Eus. He. 3.36.11). 25
Jerome, however, twice identifies it clearly with the Gospel of the Hebrews,
once in passing {In Esaiam prol. 65), 2 6 and once in explicit connection to
the occurrence of this saying in the Ignatian correspondence:
Leaving from there [Smyrna] he wrote to the Philadelphians and Smyrnaeans and
separately to Polycarp recommending the Antiochaean Church to him. In this he bore
also witness to the gospel which I have recently translated, in respect of the person of
Christ saying: "I indeed saw him in the flesh after the resurrection and I believe that it
was he, and when he came to Peter and those who were with Peter, he said to them:
'Behold, touch me and see me how that I am not a demon without a body, and
straightway they touched him and believed' {De vir. ill. 16). 27
Therefore, Beatrice reasons, not only has Eusebius's text unfortunately "so
far prevented all the scholars from recognizing that it is only one and
the same work that hides under the different titles Gospel of Peter, Kerygma
Petrou, and Didaskalia Petrou' (the direct equation of these various sources
being Beatrices own), 28 but Eusebius's admission that he does not
recognize the source of this quotation in Ignatius has also unfairly caused
scholars to ignore or discount the testimony of Jerome, because of his reli-
ance upon Eusebius. 29 For Beatrice, then, Origen and Jerome are making
use of the same non-canonical gospel, although they know it by different
names, and this same gospel was also known to Ignatius, and is the source
for Ign. Smyrn. 3:2.
The last steps in Beatrice's reconstruction are to link this (now) single
Petrine document s origin to the Gospel of the Hebrews (at this point
Origen s testimony provides "obvious evidence" 30 of this connection), and
thereby clarify the traditional web of associations surrounding the origins
of the "Jewish-Christian gospels" and the Gospel of Matthew. As for the
issues surrounding the various Jewish-Christian gospels and their commu-
nities (e.g., the Nazoreans, the Ebionites), they can equally be resolved.
Beatrice concludes: "However fragmentary the available documentation
may be, and for this reason very difficult to interpret, the most sensible
reply that I have managed to find to this question is that the Aramaic Gos-
pel of Matthew and the Gospel of the Hebrews are one and the same gos-
pel." 31 Moreover, "only one Judaeo-Christian gospel, the Gospel of the
Hebrews, seems in fact to be sufficient to explain coherently and economi-
cally all the data supplied by the ancient sources." 32 This conclusion stands
in marked contrast to Klijn s more representative view that "the presence of
three Jewish Christian gospels is an established fact." 33
This solution would certainly have the additional appeal of tightening
up the often frustrating attempts to connect these disparate early Jewish-
Christian groups, and, significantly for Ignatian scholars, resolving some
of the problems surrounding the identification of Ignatius' opponents and
the issues he addresses in his letters. This overall clarification is achieved in
part by reference to what would initially appear to be the chief stumbling
block for Beatrice s proposal; Jerome s testimony seems to attribute a first-
person eyewitness statement to Ignatius himself ("/ indeed saw him in the
flesh"). Beatrice argues that, contrary to assertions of Jerome "misreading"
Eusebius's εν σαρκί αυτόν οίδα και πιστεύω as "in carne eum vidi et credo,"
or Jerome reading accurately an alternate version of the Eusebian text (that
in turn had misread Ignatius), 34 Jerome is witness to an important textual
variant, often mistranslated, and more accurately rendered as: "Ignatius
quotes from the Gospel of the Hebrews a testimony which states: Ί saw... Z" 35
This variant reading receives further support from the medieval Latin
36
recension of Ignatius.
The only issue left, then, is the identity of the first-person speaker whose
witness to the resurrection Ignatius (via the Gospel of the Hebrews) quotes.
Beatrice thus closes the circle: Ignatius is quoting the Gospel of Hebrews, in
which the apostle Matthew (not Peter, and certainly not Ignatius himself)
gives first person testimony to his experiences. Thus, he has successfully
traced back various Petrine materials to a common source and simultane­
ously cleared up the perennial confusion over the Matthean-like material
in Ignatius in one stroke; 37 by finding their common source in a single
Jewish-Christian gospel, originally written in Aramaic, and associated with
Matthew. 38
One can naturally raise several questions concerning this proposal, many
of which Beatrice has already anticipated, beginning with Lightfoot's
observation that since Jerome himself only knows Ignatius' writings
through Eusebius, and that as he wrongly attributes this quotation to the
epistle to Polycarp, perhaps he is not wholly reliable in this matter. 39 This
is not an insurmountable obstacle, of course, and the broader question of
Jeromes reliability is really not as easily answered as many think, especially
given Beatrice s recurring defense of Jerome s reliability throughout his
essay. For example, the following question often arises: if there was a copy
of the Gospel of the Hebrews in the library at Caesarea, why does Eusebius,
who on other occasions seems to know something about this gospel, fail to
recognize the source of Ignatius' quotation? Beatrice reverses the usual
direction of this line of reasoning, noting that perhaps it is Eusebius (not
Jerome) who actually does not know this gospel as well as he says, or, alter-
nately, who has his own reasons for being less than forthcoming. 40 "When
Eusebius speaks of the Gospel of the Hebrews in the chapters devoted respec-
tively to Papias and to Hegesippus, he reports only what he had read in the
works of these two authors, and nothing else." 41
Neither is it necessarily an issue that scholars other than Beatrice who have
seen Jewish-Christians in the background of the Ignatian correspondence
still simply reckon Ign. Smyrn. 3:2 as a reference to Luke 24. 42 Seemingly
more problematic, of course, is Jerome's attribution of words to Ignatius
that more properly belong on the lips of an eyewitness to the resurrection,
which Ignatius most certainly was not. As mentioned above, however, Bea-
trice incorporates this problem into his account of the literary history of
the Gospel of the Hebrews. One could, perhaps, respond by questioning the
interpretation of the evidence from later recensions used to support
Jerome s reading of "vidi." Given that later recensions such as the long
Greek version of Ignatius explicitly connect both Luke 24:39 and John
20:21-28 to this passage, Lightfoot's passing reference to a 19th-century
suggestion that the Latin version's reading of "vidi" may simply result from
echoes of John 20:8's και ειδεν καί έπίστευσεν (at least in the minds of
later scribes) could be seen as more plausible. 43 This objection is liable to
carry little weight, however, as it is the "original" association between Luke
24 and Smyrneans 3:2 that is at issue anyway, not later readers' tendency to
view these two passages as more or less the same.
None of these objections, although they come to mind readily enough,
properly address the issue of how one is to determine textual reliance and
literary dependency, and whether or not such attempts makes sense either
in our understanding of the development of the gospel traditions or the
specific case of the Ignatian correspondence. As the issue of the presence of
written gospels within the Ignatian epistles naturally occurs within broader
scholarly discussions of the early second-century use and circulation of
these materials, Beatrice's suggestion needs to be briefly contextualized,
bearing in mind that it is always possible, of course, that these broader
patterns of scholarship themselves need revising in light of Beatrice's
proposal! 44
A chief example of one regnant approach is Helmut Koester's work,
now spanning several decades at this point in time, with his recent studies
reaffirming many of the positions first spelled out in his 1957 study of the
Synoptic traditions in the second century. 45 Koester argues for the fluidity
of the gospel traditions in the second century; "fluid" with respect to the
stability of the text of individual gospels, and fluid with respect to the
division later made between canonical and apocryphal gospels (or "autho­
rity and authenticity"). 46 For Koester, the instability of "the text" of any
particular gospel is a result of the mixture of orally performed material,
geographical differences, and religious diversity of the second century;
"free tradition" that may or may not have been equally available to the
writers of the canonical gospels. Yet scholars obviously can reasonably dis­
agree, some arguing, for example, that Ignatius "knew" the gospel of
Matthew and some of the Pauline corpus. 47 As I mentioned earlier, metho­
dological differences as regards the definition of "use" can lead to widely
varying results. 48 Perhaps, however, some of the many implications of
Beatrice's proposal can be seen more clearly by examining an example of
how this new starting point affects his analysis of Ignatius.
One example of what Beatrices new unbiased starting point might mean
for the Ignatian correspondence can be seen in his reading of an Ignatian
locus ckssicus, a passage which gives us, in the words of Charles Hill's recent
study, the "fundamental occasion for Ignatius' use of το εύαγγέλιον." 49
But I urge you to do nothing in a contentious way, but in accordance with what you
have learned in Christ. For I heard some saying: "If I do not find it in the ancient
records [τα αρχεία], I do not believe in the gospel." And when I said to them, "It is
written," they replied to me, "That is just the question." But for me, Jesus Christ is the
ancient records; the sacred ancient records are his cross and death, and his resurrec-
tion, and the faith that comes through him—by which things I long to be made
righteous by your prayer. 50
In Beatrice's reading, then, Ignatius' juxtaposition of the "gospel" and the
"archives" is concerned with the "content and interpretation" of the Gospel
of the Hebrews, a text that Beatrice is now able to propose was "at the centre
of fierce debates in the Christian communities of the Syro-Asiatic area
between the end of the first century and the first half of the second
century. ?1
This conclusion is unlikely to persuade many scholars for a variety of
reasons, among them the hastily drawn connections between a possible
quotation from a text to the view that it is the status of that very text that
serves as the central component of the controversy in this important Igna-
tian passage. I grant, of course, that one could possibly maintain that even
if Ign. Phld. 8:2 is not read this way, and thus has nothing whatsoever to
do with the Gospel of the Hebrews, this assessment may have nothing to do
with the possibly separate question of whether or not Ign. Smyrn. 3:2 is a
quote from that Gospel! However, if a new starting point is proposed, one
might reasonably want to see the directions in which the author of the new
point of departure thinks to travel. Thus, if Ign. Phld. 8:2 is simply a refe-
rence to the Gospel of the Hebrews and its relationship to the Old Testament
(the usual view of the "archives"), then how does this solution affect our
understanding, either of this passage or of the Ignatian epistles? 52 Beatrice
expands on his reading:
It would certainly be useful to reconsider the whole controversy of Ignatius with the
Docetists, such as has not been done, in the terms of a theological confrontation
which hinges essentially upon the evaluation of the Gospel of the Hebrews, of its rela-
tionship to the Old Testament, of its doctrinal context and of its normative authority
for the faith. 53
But as I have written earlier, interpretation of this passage in Philadelphians
is always determined by the decisions one has previously made about a
variety of issues:
One can read either, "If I find it not in the archives, that is, in the gospel, I do not
believe it," or the more common, "if I find it not in the archives, I do not believe in
the gospel." έαν μη έν τοις άρχείοις εΰρω έν τω εύαγγελίω ου πιστεύω, of course, can
be punctuated to read either way. This question of emphasis/punctuation is not readily
separated, however, from the exegetical decisions one makes about the meaning of τα
αρχεία, Ignatius' understanding of the gospel, or larger questions about the role of
scripture in the early church. Rather, such decisions are determinative for one's under­
standing of the proper punctuation of this passage. 54
Thus, to clarify matters slightly, even in Hills assessment of this passage,
where "gospel" could be a written source, if not the specific written text of
the Gospel of the Hebrews, the gospel is still something quite different than
Scripture (Old Testament). What does Beatrices solution mean, then,
against the backdrop of so many previous studies of early second-century
Christian literature that have not only expressed reservations about whether
or not the term "gospel" really refers to a written document during this
early time period (cf. Hills careful approach in this regard)? And what
might this mean in the context of Ign. Phld. 8:2 where many scholars have
equally argued that it seems that it is the very over-reliance on a traditional
written authority that Ignatius is combating? 55 Assessing the use of written
gospels and the attitudes towards them and their texts in the second cen-
tury is difficult even where a relative abundance of evidence exists (not the
case with the Gospel of the Hebrews) because of the long-standing recogni-
tion of the gospels as oral material, even when encountered in written
form. As John Barton has argued in some detail, even when the gospels
were encountered as texts, they were often still conceived of as oral, albeit
in a sense that "did not in practice rule out the use of books." 56 This state
of affairs means, then, that arguing about the "status" of a specific Chri-
stian text has an extremely high hurdle to overcome, and that Beatrice's
intriguing proposal likely will need further argumentation to prove persu-
asive as either a "starting point," or as an explanation of Ign. Phld. 8:2. By
way of contrast, and as a means of establishing the framework in which my
final reservations can be best expressed, I would first like to point out a few
issues arising from perhaps the least controversial example of textual reli-
ance in Ignatius.
Given that the only Christian "text" that Ignatius clearly cites (and that he
is universally recognized as citing) is 1 Corinthians, and he fails to reference
it (as Scripture or in any other way whatsoever), despite his recognition of
Pauls activity as a writer of letters (Ign. Eph. 12:2), what does it mean to
so easily speak of Ignatius as "quoting" a written gospel? 57 The assessment
I made earlier (without benefit of Bartons study) argued that Paul's wri-
tings were only en route to becoming authoritative.
The clarity with which Ignatius cites Paul and Ignatius' use of such an idiosyncratic
passage as 1 Cor 15.8 as a stylistic model seem to indicate that 1 Corinthians is well
on its way to gaining widespread use and recognition with Ignatius' audience. The
references Ignatius makes to Paul and his use of Pauline vocabulary bear additional
witness to the authoritative status, notoï 1 Corinthians, but to the figure of Paul him-
self. . . . Pauls writings thus seem to be in a transitional state, not yet normative on the
same level as biblical material, but recognizable enough to be used as stylistic and
theological models based on their connection to the person of Paul. 58
The issues peculiar to Ign. Phld. 8:2 s relativization of the "authority" of
written sources like the Old Testament, then, at least in comparison to the
authority of the "gospel" proclaimed by a bishop following "in the foot-
steps" of the apostle Paul, should make one wary of overly confident scho-
larly claims about having reached a point from which "unbiased" analysis
of gospel materials can now proceed. 59 1 will repeat in simpler terms that
there is every indication that 1 Corinthians is used, but not cited, by Igna-
tius because / Corinthians is not an authority. The language of 1 Corinthi-
ans, however, has authority because it is Pauls. 60 This point should not be
misunderstood, since it seems to ignore an obvious association or a simple
shorthand manner of saying that Pauls writings have authority because
they are written by Paul. This is undoubtedly so, but Paul is not used as a
written text. Another recent essay in the NTAF centennial project, David
M. Reis s study of Ignatius' use of Paul as a mimetic model, mirrors this
assessment insofar as he also notes that there is no need for Ignatius to cite
Pauls words, since "the bishops close connection to Pauline vocabulary,
ideas, and argumentation have the effect of inviting his readers to identify
him with Paul." 61 Lest this idea seem overly subtle, it is very much the
point Barton makes concerning the canonical Gospels throughout much
of the second century. "The practical consequence of this [emphasis on the
spoken word], once there were written Gospels, was that authority was
accorded not to these books directly, but more obliquely to what they stood
for or what was taken to be the heart of them." 62 This assessment would
certainly fit the use of both Pauline and "gospel" materials (should they
actually be present) in Ignatius, although it creates a problem for reconstruc-
ting his sources. But if the only Christian text Ignatius can be universally
agreed to have known was reproduced with some care as to wording, but
with no care whatsoever to signal that the words are not his own, we clearly
are in a state of great difficulty in terms of any "other" texts, particularly
non-extant ones, since we also have the luxury of having 1 Corinthians at
hand.
Lastly, and most obviously, should our usual understanding of the circum-
stances surrounding the composition of Ignatius' letters be accurate, it is
unreasonable to expect written sources to have even been available, and
thus recognizing they were even being referenced leaves us dependent on
Ignatius' memory, and his notable lack of any citation formulas. 63 Four
decades ago Robert M. Grant observed that Ignatius was "almost certainly
not using books at the time he wrote, whether or not he had used them
earlier." 64
There are several separate issues here, and although they do need to be
treated individually, they must be understood together. First, is the wor-
ding in Ign. Smyrn. 3:2 so different from Luke that it is as easy to see as
Beatrice and so many others claim? For scholars, especially textual critics,
who spend their professional lives examining minor variations in the wor-
ding of a text, the differences are extremely noteworthy. I am not so sure,
however, that the differences would be so obvious to all readers in all places
and times. Much depends on what sources we assume to be available to
Ignatius, and whether or not he was capable of accurately reproducing that
source (whether Luke, Lukan tradition, a tradition shared with Luke, or
something else entirely such as a "sentence flottante"), 65 or if he even would
have deemed such careful use of a written authority (or oral tradition) to
be worthy of such attention had it been accessible. That is to say, Ignatius
was likely simply unable (as I am) to "check his sources," whether or not he
had sources he normally would have checked. 66 How much more difficult
is this line of inquiry with an unflagged quotation from a non-extant
Gospel?
Once again Robert M. Grant neatly encapsulated all of these points.
It is possible to hold that either that Ignatius was relying upon memories of what he
had read (scripture) or that he was relying upon memories of what he had heard (oral
tradition). To make a decision is very difficult. Analogies inevitably enter into consid-
eration. The kind of memory ascribed to Ignatius tends to be the kind of memory
possessed by the scholar discussing his work. 67
Grant then notes, in reference to Ign. Smyrn. 3:2, that while "it is not
absolutely impossible" that Ignatius used an apocryphal gospel, "it seems
just as likely that he was using Luke." 68 This may seem a rather minimalist
conclusion, and neither it, nor even the more cautious assessments of
Schoedel or Bovon, carry the revolutionary implications of the confident
conclusions reached by Beatrice. Yet proceeding from how Ignatius treats
sources (like 1 Corinthians) acknowledged as definitely present in his let-
ters seems far wiser, even when this procedure simply indicates further
speculation to be precarious. This precariousness becomes most evident
when Beatrice attempts in his closing paragraphs, however tentatively, to
chart a new course for the Synoptic Problem based on the results of his
proposal. The Q source, as it turns out, "is in fact no more than that por-
tion of the Aramaic Gospel of the Hebrews which was reused and altered
in various ways in the Greek canonical gospels of Matthew and Luke." 69
Beatrice concludes by cleverly applying the words of Ign. Smyrn. 3:2 to
scholarship on Q: "the Greek source Q seems to be condemned to remain
a 'bodiless demon, or more simply an optical illusion." 70 Yet solidity is in
the eye of the beholder; one scholar's firm ground is another scholar's house
built on sand. Even arguments of textual reliance via seemingly compelling
parallels to Ign. Smyrn. 3:2 can simply be reversed in terms of their impli-
cations, as Vincent has already done in his late dating of the Ignatian mate-
rials on the basis of the same passage. 71 It may well be possible that Q is
nothing more than a portion of the Aramaic Gospel of the Hebrews, but it
is a suggestion that I imagine will need additional argumentation to persu-
ade many Synoptic specialists. Yet, however firmer the textual grounding
an approach like Beatrice's appears to have beneath it (and this is surely its
appeal, in addition to restoring a lost "original" Aramaic gospel), the temp-
tation to step confidently onto this new ground must be resisted.
The most notable reservation I have is, as it happens, one that does not
require assessing Jerome or Eusebius (or anyone else) as reliable or unreli-
able. It is also a reservation notably unmentioned in most of the studies I
have cited thus far. Grant that Jerome encountered a group of Aramaic
speakers who presumably represented themselves as standing in an unbro-
ken lineage to the original Aramaic speaking community around Jesus,
and thus their Aramaic gospel as an original of some sort, and let us also
grant that this Aramaic gospel did indeed contain the passages that Jerome
says it does. Let us grant all of these claims, and furthermore give Jerome
the fullest benefit of the doubt as to his own memory and moral character.
This does not mean that these claims that either Jerome (or the community
whose gospel he uses) makes are historically accurate claims. By the fourth
century, after-all, so-called orthodox Christians, heretical Christians, and
Jewish Tannaim all claimed to represent traditions in an unbroken chain
back to the original apostles or the Pharisaic "traditions of the elders," and
all claimed to have traditions, stories, and texts that represented these
unbroken chains of transmission. A broader perspective would likely see
that, given the prevalence of claims of pure spiritual lineage (with an
equally pure transmission of texts and teaching), and their repeated con-
trast with the "impure" lineages of so-called heresies, one should not take
these claims at face value. 72 In fact, without exception, many scholars now
recognize these other claims as serving the contexts in which the commu-
nities making these claims lived, not as historical reality. Thus, Jerome's
testimony does not actually get us back to an original Aramaic gospel
behind the text of Ignatius (who betrays no knowledge of non-Greek lan-
guage materials at any rate) or the Synoptics for that matter, but it really
only testifies to the belief of a 4th-century Christian sect concerning the
authenticity of their gospel. It would be more surprising (and highly un-
likely) were there a group not claiming apostolic authorship and authen-
tication for such a text. Combined with the "generally accepted idea that
the canonical Gospel of Matthew was originally written in Hebrew or
Aramaic," 73 Jerome s views may simply be repeating the origin myth sur-
rounding the group whose gospel he encountered.
That many Christians were and are attracted to Jewish gospels because
of their connection to the "original" community around Jesus is not to be
doubted, but I fail to see how the claims made for this text are much stron-
ger than those made for the "canonical" gospels. 74 Taken alongside of the
problems which beset the study of Ignatius' sources, Beatrice's erudite
reconstruction is ultimately more appealing than persuasive. In this regard
I do agree with Beatrice that there is, as it happens, an analogy of sorts
between the contents of Ign. Smyrn. 3:2 and Luke 24 to some scholarly
writing, although I would apply this analogy quite differently than Bea-
trice does. Fearing its phantasmal nature, the disciples are scared to touch
the tangible body of the risen Jesus, while some scholars are scared to
embrace the possibly phantasmal nature of gospel traditions in the Igna-
tian letters, preferring to grasp at objects reassuring in their seeming
solidity.