In 2 Cor 13:1-2, Paul warns the Corinthians by citing a prescription of
Deuteronomy (19:15): "By the mouth of two or three witnesses must
every charge be substantiated" (επί στόματος δύο μαρτύρων και τριών
σταθήσεται παν ρήμα). 1 The reason for Paul's citation of this rule of judi­
cial evidence, and its relevance to the charge of embezzlement under dis­
cussion since 12:14, have been obscured in the history of interpretation
2
by a "highly artificial" construal of the "three witnesses" of Scripture as
Paul's three visits to Corinth. This interpretation, which goes back to
Chrysostom and the Catena, 3 was taken over by Calvin, 4 and has estab­
lished itself as the dominant explanation of the passage among modern
commentators. 5 The interpretation rests upon the assumption that, since
the citation immediately follows Pauls announcement, "This is the third
time (τρίτον) I am coming to you" in 13: la, the third visit of the announce­
ment and the three witnesses of the scriptural citation must somehow cor­
6
respond. Accordingly, Paul wishes to give his third visit the status of a
third witness in a judicial case: just as a (second or) third witness supplies
corroborative evidence against an accused, so Paul's third visit to Corinth
should silence all objections and provide the basis for a verdict. 7
However, the assumption that Paul is speaking metaphorically in 13:1
is encumbered with difficulties, because the analogy between "visits" and
"witnesses" is far from perfect. First, the three visits by Paul do not satisfy
the requirements of the text that Paul quotes, since they would still consti­
tute the testimony of only a single witness, Paul himself, whereas the scrip­
ture requires the evidence of two or three different witnesses. 8 Second, the
Deuteronomic rule demands, or at least implies, the simultaneous appear­
ance of two or three witnesses to sustain a charge, while Paul's visits to
Corinth follow one after another, separated by temporal intervals. 9 Third,
it is difficult to imagine how Paul could have regarded his initial, "founda-
tion" visit, devoted to the proclamation of the gospel, and attended by a
number of conversions (Acts 18:10), as a witness against the Corinthians. 10
Interpreters are, naturally, conscious of these defects in the analogy and
seek to remedy them. Thus, Wilhelm Bousset suggests that Paul applies
the Deuteronomic ruling loosely, "with a certain whimsy." 11 This sugges-
tion is unlikely, given the threatening tone of the passage. 12 Windisch con-
cedes that Paul's choice of Deut 19:15 is "unfortunate" from a modern
point of view, but opines, condescendingly, that such a contrived analogy
is what one might expect of a Rabbinical student like Paul. 13 Recognizing
that Paul's foundation visit cannot qualify as a witness against the Corin-
thians, Bultmann supposes that Paul is thinking of the present letter, 2 Cor
10-13, as the second of the three witnesses. 14 But this suggestion only
complicates an already strained analogy. 15 In an effort to shore up the met-
aphorical interpretation, Hendrik van Vliet proposes that Paul must have
been familiar with the development of the idea of "witnesses" into that of
"warnings" in Rabbinic literature; by citing the rule of judicial evidence,
Paul would be reminding the Corinthians that he has given them the
requisite two or three "warnings," prior to coming to exercise discipline. 16
This suggestion has the advantage of largely dissolving the untenable con-
nection between visits and witnesses, and hence it is favored by a number
of commentators. 17 Unfortunately, the reinterpretation of "witnesses" as
"warnings" in Jewish legal tradition cannot be traced back into the time of
Paul. The application of the rule of judicial evidence to cases of persons
suspected of wrongdoing, in the sense of "warnings" before witnesses, is
first attested in the Mishnah tractate on "The Suspected Adulteress" (Sotah
1.1-2), dated to the second century C.E. 18
With all of these difficulties, we have not yet mentioned the most seri-
ous defect to which the metaphorical interpretation of Paul's scripture cita-
tion is exposed: it assumes that Paul takes no account oí uve purpose of the
Deuteronomic rule! The requirement of multiple witnesses—three, or at
least two—was meant to protect the accused hora a single malicious witness
intent on doing harm. 19 But the view that Paul is speaking metaphorically
of his visits as "witnesses" against the Corinthians makes Paul apply the
rule of judicial evidence against the accused. 20 Some interpreters are sensible
of this contradiction and seek to diminish the tension by loosening Paul's
connection to the text of Deuteronomy. Thus, van Vliet observes that the
dictum is not explicitly marked as a citation of Scripture (by an introduc-
tory formula, such as καθώς γέγραπται), and suggests that Paul quotes the
rule only as "a sort of proverb." 21 Earl Ellis explains that Paul applies the
Deuteronomic rule loosely, in order "to clothe his own thoughts." 22 Hans
Lietzmann dismisses the inconsistency with the observation that "Paul
shows few scruples in the manipulation of citations, when the wording
provides him with any sort of useful handle." 23 But it seems perverse to
defend an interpretation which requires us to assume that Paul used a cita­
tion of Scripture contrary to its stated purpose and without consideration
of its context. Perhaps we should re-examine the assumptions of the meta­
phorical interpretation, even if it rests upon the authority of the church
fathers!
There are good reasons to suppose that Paul was cognizant of the pur­
pose of the Deuteronomic rule of judicial evidence, and that he used the
citation here in a manner consistent with that purpose. First, the wording
of 13: lb departs only slightly from the text of the Septuagint, and is essen­
tially a literal quotation: the Septuagint repeats the phrase επί στόματος
24
("by the mouth") before τριών μαρτύρων. The wording of Paul's citation
is even closer to that of Matt 18:16, suggesting that Paul and Matthew
used the same recension of the Greek text of the Old Testament, a recen­
25
sion also known to the author of the Testament of Abraham. Thus, the
fact that Paul does not explicitly identify the rule of evidence as a citation
26
of Scripture is insignificant; we must assume that Paul was aware that he
was quoting Deuteronomy, and that he would not have been ignorant of
the context and purpose of the legislation. Second, the Deuteronomic rule
of judicial evidence enjoyed a broad currency in Palestinian Judaism and in
early Christianity. In addition to the texts referenced above, the following
writings cite or allude to the Deuteronomic rule, or presuppose its opera­
tion in accounts of events: C D IX.16-23; 1 Tim 5:19; John 8:17; Heb
10:28; Mark l4:55-59. 27 Each of the texts which cite the Deuteronomic
code reflects an awareness of its purpose, and, for the most part, applies it
in ways that are consistent with its original intent. This is clearest in 1 Tim
5:19: "Never accept any accusation against an elder except on the evidence
of two or three witnesses." 28 Even when the authors of these texts seek to
lessen the stringency of the Deuteronomic requirement, in the interest of
community discipline, there is consciousness of the purpose of the statute,
namely, to protect the accused. In the Damascus Rule of the Jewish sectar­
ians, the biblical commandment is reinterpreted to permit a verdict in
cases where an offence is witnessed by two individuals on separate occa­
sions, or when two witnesses testify to a different offence; but the reinter-
pretation does not result in the suspension of the requirement of multiple
witnesses in order to protect the accused. 29 The only ambiguous instance is
Matt 18:16, where it is not clear whether the witnesses serve to strengthen
the brother's admonition, 30 or to protect the sinner in case the admonisher
is wrong. 31 In light of the evidence of contemporary sources, it seems best
to assume that Paul was cognizant of the purpose of the Deuteronomic
rule and used it in a way that was consistent with that purpose.
Who, then, are the accused whom Paul seeks to protect by citing the
rule of judicial evidence? A minority of interpreters suggest that the Cor-
inthians are the ones who will have to answer charges of misconduct in a
formal hearing which Paul will convene when he comes to Corinth. 32 Thus
Paul cites the Deuteronomic rule to assure his Corinthian readers that he
will follow due process in evaluating whatever charges may be brought
against members of the congregation. This suggestion is unlikely, however,
since it entails Paul asking members of the Corinthian church to testify
against each other—something that could not fail to exacerbate the dis-
cord that Paul deplores in 12:20. 33 Upon reflection, it seems clear that this
interpretation is the product of the atomistic approach of commentators:
the mention of the "impurity, immorality, and licentiousness" which the
Corinthians have practiced in 12:21 is taken to indicate that Paul plans to
hold a court of inquiry into the Corinthians' misconduct. 34 It is possible,
of course, that the persons who had previously committed sexual sins
(12:21) were the same as those who have recently aroused discord in con-
nection with the charge of financial misconduct against Paul (12:20). But
the best explanation of the mention of sexual sins, at the climax of a para-
graph (12:14-21) in which Paul defends himself against the allegation of
embezzlement (12:16-18) and recollects the unpleasant aftermath of the
charge (12:19-21), is that Paul consistently connects sexual immorality
with social disorders (1 Thess 4:1-12; 1 Cor 10; Rom 1:18-32), because he
believes that the passion of desire exposes the body of Christ to pollution
from the outside world, as Dale Martin has shown. 35 Thus, "impurity"
(ακαθαρσία), immorality (πορνεία), and licentiousness (ασέλγεια)" belong
with "strife (ερις), jealousy (ζήλος), and anger (θυμός)" to a general com­
plex of behaviors that threaten the church, because they derive from the
polluted cosmos opposed to God. 3 6 In any case, we should not abstract
Paul's mention of the immorality of the Corinthians in 12:21 from the
broader context of his defense of his financial conduct, and his expression
of anxiety lest he be humiliated again, in our search for a rationale for
Paul's citation of the rule of judicial evidence. We conclude that the Cor­
inthians were not the ones whom Paul sought to assure of legal protection
by citing the Deuteronomic statute.
Paul himself is the accused who seeks protection under the Deuteronomic
rule from pernicious accusation by a malicious witness. Paul cites the rule
not only in self-defense, but also as a warning to the Corinthians of the
punishment that will fall upon those who are complicit in the wrong done
to him, should the testimony of the single witness be shown to be false,
in accordance with the Deuteronomic statute. This conclusion, which is
almost without precedent in the history of interpretation, 37 has the consid­
erable advantage of taking Paul's citation of the Deuteronomic rule liter­
ally, rather than metaphorically, on the assumption that Paul applies the
rule in a manner consistent with its original purpose. More importantly,
this interpretation offers a coherent account of the function of the scrip­
tural citation of 13:1 in the context of Paul's exhortation to the Corinthian
church in 12:14-13:4. Having concluded the foolish self-commendation
that he was forced to provide (12:11-13), Paul turns to preparations for his
impending third visit (12:14). A large obstacle looms in the way of the
successful completion of Paul's collection project: suspicion of fraudulent
conduct. Paul endeavors to remove this obstacle by four arguments: 1) an
assurance of the purity of his motives, representing himself as a solicitous
parent and a generous patron (12:14-15); 2) an appeal to the probity of
Titus' conduct in the administration of the collection, designed to expose
the absurdity of the charge of embezzlement (12:16-18); 3) an admonition
to prevent the recurrence of the ugly conflict which erupted on the occa­
sion of Paul's second visit, because it was destructive of community and
humiliating to Paul (12:19-21); 4) a warning of the punitive consequences,
if the charge against Paul should not be substantiated, in accordance with
the scriptural rule of judicial evidence (13:1-4). Only a literal interpreta­
tion of Paul's scripture citation in 13:1, which recognizes that Paul himself
is the individual whose protection is in view, takes sufficient account of the
fact that Paul is defending himself against the charge of financial miscon­
duct and anticipating the likely future effects of the charge throughout the
exhortation of 12:14-13:4.
A full appreciation of the relevance of the Deuteronomic rule to the
situation of the embattled apostle emerges only from examination of the
context of the words that Paul quotes from Deuteronomy. The paragraph
"on witnesses" (in Deut 19:15-21) opens with a restatement of the prohi­
bition of conviction on the testimony of a single witness. The point of the
restatement is to expand a principle designed to protect the accused in
capital cases (Num 35:30; Deut 17:6) into a general rule of judicial evi­
dence. 38 Thus: "A single witness shall not suffice to witness against a person
regarding any wrong (πάσα αδικία) or any transgression (παν αμάρτημα)
or any sin (πάσα αμαρτία) which he may commit" (Deut 19:15, LXX).
The focus of the legislation on the protection of the individual from perni­
cious accusation is clearly indicated by a proviso which immediately fol­
lows the restatement of the rule of "two or three witnesses": "If a malicious
witness (μάρτυς άδικος) undertakes to accuse a person of impiety, then
the two parties between whom there is a dispute shall appear before the
Lord and before the priests and before the judges who may be in office in
those days, and the judges shall make a thorough inquiry" (Deut 19:Ιο­
ί 8a, LXX). In the interest of retributive justice, the Deuteronomic code
then stipulates that a punishment corresponding to the harm intended for
the accused shall be inflicted upon the malicious witness, should his testi­
mony be shown to be false: "And behold, if a malicious witness (μάρτυς
άδικος) witnessed unjust things (άδικα) against his brother, then you shall
do to him the evil thing which he sought to do against his brother, and you
shall purge the evil from your midst" (Deut 19:18b-19, LXX). The punish­
ment of the malicious witness is meant to have a deterrent effect upon the
congregation: "And the rest shall hear and shall be afraid, and a pernicious
accusation such as this (το ρήμα το πονηρον τοΰτο) shall never again be
made among you" (Deut 19:20, LXX). The paragraph on witnesses closes
with the admonition "Do not spare" (ου φείσεται) in punishing the mali­
cious witness, strengthened by invocation of the lex talionis: "a life for a
life, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a hand for a hand, a foot for a
foot" (Deut 19:21, LXX).
Only when the full text of the Deuteronomic statute is before us can we
appreciate the skillfulness of Pauls application of the rule to his present
situation. Having been accused of embezzlement by someone in Corinth
(12:16-18), and having left Corinth in disgrace, Paul now anticipates, with
anxiety, what may happen when he returns (12:20-21). Paul seeks a pro­
phylaxis against a repetition of the damaging charge, and finds it in the
legal regulation of Deut. 19, a text that suits his purposes in every way.
First, a citation of the Jewish scriptures was calculated to impress his Corin­
thian critics; Dieter Georgi has found evidence in a number of passages in
2 Corinthians that the Christology of Paul's Corinthian critics was shaped
by conceptions rooted in Hellenistic Judaism. 39 Second, and more impor­
tantly, citation of the Deuteronomic rule represents the charge against
Paul as a "pernicious accusation" (το ρήμα το πονηρόν), and casts the one
who brings the charge in the role of a "malicious witness" (μάρτυς άδικος).
Thus Paul construes himself as the victim and his Corinthian critic as the
culprit. Third, the invocation of the Deuteronomic rule entails a warning
for anyone familiar with the context of the statute: the evil intended for the
accused will fall back upon the accuser in the form of punishment, should
the charge remain unsubstantiated, and should the witness be unjust. This
implication of the Deuteronomic rule explains the connection between 2
Cor 13:1 and 13:2, the transition from Pauls invocation of the rule to his
reminder of the punishment: anyone involved in false witness against Paul
is hereby warned of the punishment that awaits him. Like the congrega­
tion of Israel, the Corinthians "shall hear and be afraid."
It is significant confirmation of our interpretation of 2 Cor 13:1-2 that
Pauls vocabulary echoes so fully the language of the Deuteronomic statute
on witnesses, not only in the immediate context, but elsewhere in chs. 10-13,
where Paul alludes to the charge of financial misconduct, and later in
2 Cor 7:12, as Paul looks back upon the harm that someone intended to
40
do to him. In 11:7, at Pauls first explicit mention of his financial rela­
tionship with the Corinthians, he asks whether, in his decision to preach
the gospel to the Corinthians "free of charge," he had committed "a sin"
(αμαρτία). Then in 12:13, when Paul recurs to his decision not to "bur­
den" the Corinthians financially, he exclaims, ironically, "Forgive me this
wrong (αδικία)!" Interpreters have puzzled over the incongruity of the
terms αμαρτία and αδικία as descriptions of Pauls refusal of financial sup­
port from Corinth. 4 1 Now we discover that precisely these terms are used
in the first sentence of the Deuteronomic statute: "A single witness shall
not suffice to witness against a person regarding any wrong (αδικία) or any
sin (αμαρτία) which he may commit" (Deut 19:15). Similarly, the verb
φείδομαι, by which Paul threatens the Corinthians with punishment in
13:2 (ου φείσομαι, "I will not spare"), is the same verb used in the scrip­
tural admonition not to be lenient in punishing the malicious witness in
Deut 19:21 (ου φείσεται, "Do not spare"). It strains credulity to suggest
that these verbal correspondences are accidental, in light of Paul's literal
citation of Deut 19:15. Most significant of all is Paul's use of the participle
άδικήσας in 2 Cor 7:12 to describe the one who had given offence; an
adjective of this same term—namely, άδικος—is found in Deut 19:16, 18
as the description of the malicious witness, μάρτυς άδικος, literally "an
unjust witness." 42
The implications of our exegesis of 2 Cor 13:1-2 for an understanding
of the affair of the "wrongdoer" are clear and significant. 43 First, the accu­
sation of financial misconduct against Paul, made on the occasion of his
"painful" second visit to Corinth, was the testimony of a single witness.
The individual whom Paul describes as ό άδικήσας rose alone in the assem­
bly of the Corinthian Christians to accuse Paul of embezzlement in con­
nection with the collection. We may speculate about the reasons for his
singularity on that occasion. Perhaps others did not share his suspicions, or
did not share them to the same degree. Perhaps others were reluctant to
offend the apostle, even if they harbored doubts about Pauls motives. Per­
haps the auctoritas of the wrongdoer was so great that he was not perceived
as needing a "second," and others could afford to remain silent. But Pauls
citation of the rule of "two or three witnesses" is only effective as an argu­
ment, if one assumes that the charge against Paul was the testimony of a
single witness. At the time of composition of 2 Cor 10-13, the charge of
embezzlement remained uncorroborated.
Second, the venue in which the charge was brought forward was a quasi-
judicial proceeding in the Christian assembly, rather than a civic court.
This conclusion is made more certain by the fact that no rule requiring
two or more witnesses is known in Greek or Roman jurisprudence. 44 Before
the court of Roman Corinth a person might well be convicted on the tes­
timony of a single witness. 45 Pauls application of the Deuteronomic rule
to his situation presumes a legal context in which the requirement of mul­
tiple witnesses would have operated. In citing the Deuteronomic rule, Paul
is not only anticipating the proceedings that he may instigate when he
returns to Corinth, he is also looking back upon what was said and done
46
on the occasion of his second visit, as 13:2 makes clear. Ironically, the
church court before which Paul was accused was probably one such as Paul
47
himself had instructed the Corinthians to establish in 1 Cor 6:1-11.
Third, it seems likely that Paul had already invoked the Deuteronomic
statute on the occasion of his second visit to Corinth. This far-reaching
conclusion is based squarely upon a literal construction of Paul's warning
in 13:2. The perfect tense of the verb προείρηκα signifies a warning which
Paul had issued on a previous occasion. 48 The circumstantial participle
παρών το δεύτερον specifies the second visit to Corinth as the occasion
when the warning was given. 49 The οτι clause formulates the actual content
of what Paul said on that occasion: εάν έλθω εις το πάλιν ου φείσομαι ("If
I come again, I will not spare"). 50 As observed above, Paul uses the wording
of Deut 19:21 (φείδομαι) in formulating his threat. Moreover, it is more
natural to regard the uses of the Deuteronomic terms αμαρτία and αδικία
in 11:7 and 12:13 as echoes of a rule that Paul had already invoked than as
proleptic allusions to a scripture that he will cite only several paragraphs
later. We may conclude that, on the occasion of Pauls second visit to
Corinth, when he was accused by the wrongdoer of the crime of embezzle­
ment before a judicial assembly of the Corinthian Christians (12:16-18),
as the assembly threatened to degenerate into disorder, amidst "angry out­
bursts, slanders, whisperings, arrogant opinions" (12:20), Paul invoked the
protection of the Deuteronomic rule: "By the mouth of two or three wit­
nesses must every charge be substantiated!"
The conclusion that Paul invoked the Deuteronomic rule on the occa­
sion of his second visit to Corinth has two further, dramatic implications.
First, Pauls interposition of the Deuteronomic rule was evidently success­
ful in suspending a verdict. This is a necessary inference from the obvious,
yet highly significant fact that Paul is still defending himself and his finan­
cial conduct throughout 2 Cor 10-13 in the hope, however tenuous, that
something may yet be "reckoned to his account" (λογίζεσθαι). Up to this
point, the criticisms of Paul echoed in 10:1, 2, 10; 11:7, 16, etc. have been
so acerbic, and Pauls response to the criticism has been so bellicose and
hyperbolic (e.g., 10:1-6; 11:16-21), that there has been little reason to
hope that the conflict between Paul and his opponents in Corinth might
find a happy resolution. But now we have the first, clear indication that, by
invoking the rule of judicial evidence, Paul managed to escape a decision
that would have terminated his relationships and squandered their poten­
tial benefits for his collection effort.
Second, and more importantly, our exegesis of 2 Cor 13:1-2 implies
that, on the occasion of his second visit to Corinth, Paul declined to
demand the punishment of his accuser, which the Deuteronomic statute
authorized, when the testimony of the single witness remained uncorrobo­
rated. This conclusion results, once again, from a literal construction of
13:2b, attributing to the conjunction δτι a recitative function, and seeing
in the phrase εάν έλθω εις το πάλιν ου φείσομαι a quotation of the actual
words that Paul used on taking his departure from Corinth: "If I come
again, I will not spare." 52 That is to say, Paul postponed the punishment
which the Deuteronomic statute permitted him to exact. This temporary
amnesty was interpreted by Pauls critics as a sign of "weakness" (13:3-4).
Paul, on the other hand, regarded it as a show of "leniency," as an act of
"mercy." 53 In any case, Paul's decision to refrain from inflicting punish­
ment on the occasion of his "painful" visit left open the possibility of rec­
onciliation with the "unjust witness."
Looking back over our exegesis of 2 Cor 13:1-2 and its implications,
one might well ask why this interpretation is without significant precedent
in the history of scholarship, given its obvious advantages: a secure founda­
tion upon a literal construction of Pauls words, a plausible assumption
that Paul was cognizant of the purpose and context of the Deuteronomic
rule, and a reasonable conclusion that Paul applied the Deuteronomic stat­
ute skillfully to his own situation. And why should a metaphorical con­
struction of Paul's words in 13:1-2 have come to dominate the history of
interpretation, in spite of its acknowledged difficulties and highly artificial
character, including the implausible assumption that Paul took no account
of the purpose or context of the Deuteronomic statute, and the unwar­
ranted conclusion that Paul used the citation loosely to clothe his own
thoughts? One suspects that the explanation of this conundrum lies in a
tendency that surfaces repeatedly in the history of interpretation of 2 Cor­
inthians: a resistance to the recognition that the apostle suffered a pro­
found humiliation at the hands of a Corinthian convert. One encounters
this resistance in the unwillingness of some scholars to acknowledge that
Paul himself is "the one wronged" (ό αδικηθείς) in 2 Cor 7:12. 54 One
meets this resistance again in the colorless accounts of what Paul experi­
enced on the occasion of his second visit to Corinth, accounts which fail
to capture the depth of shame and degradation embodied in the verb
ταπεινόω in 12:21. 5 5 Indeed, some scholars adduce as an argument in favor
of the metaphorical interpretation of 2 Cor 13:1 that it positions Paul
not only as the witness against the Corinthians, but also as the judge
over the Corinthians! 56 The minority interpretation of the passage, which
views the Corinthians as the ones whose (mis) conduct will be evaluated in
accordance with the Deuteronomic statute, does not differ from the dom­
inant, metaphorical interpretation, in respect to the role that it assigns to
Paul: Paul functions as the "supreme judge" over the community, like the
mebaqqer, as described in the Damascus Document, 57 So difficult is it for
interpreters of the Pauline tradition to imagine an apostle who was not
always in control! We submit that our interpretation of 2 Cor 13:1-2 is the
most congruent with the context of Pauls defense against charges of finan­
cial misconduct, and the most natural understanding of Pauls citation of
the Deuteronomic statute. But our interpretation comes at the cost of the
recognition that the apostle suffered a profound humiliation at the hands
of one of his own converts. We should not be surprised if this cost were too
high for many interpreters to bear.
